= Web application 2.0 features
hilton
v1.0, 2007-08-06
:title: Web application 2.0 features
:tags: [web-applications]

After
you have built the initial version of a web application, it can be hard
to know what to add in version 2.0, tricky to know how add value and
make it https://blog/lunatech.com/posts/2007-01-31/business-class-software[Article: Business class or economy?], and near-impossible to
understand what features a *web 2.0* application actually has. This
article describes some common features that you might think are merely
Nice To Have, and why you might really need them sooner rather than
later.

The following features are most relevant for a public Internet web
application that people use to organise some set of data, in
collaboration with each other. Your mileage may vary for other kinds of
applications.

* link:#data[Data management features]: success messages, fewer required
fields, data input validation, data validation warnings.
* link:#integration[Software integration features]: OpenSearch API for
queries, iCalendar URLs for date-related data, KML URLs for geographic
data, export data to a file, import data from a file.
* link:#collaboration[Collaboration features]: comments, tags, change
notifications, recent changes.
* link:#user-interface[User-interface features]: dashboard, favourites,
edit-in-place.

[[data]]
== Data management features

Better data management features are mostly about supporting user needs
for data entry, instead of attempting to dictate how someone uses your
software: let the user do what they want, and tell them what is going
on.

=== Success messages

Show a success message at the top of the page after the user has
successfully made a permanent change to some data. Use a green tick
icon, and be specific about what changed.

This is an improvement on the standard behaviour, which should be to
show a page that includes the updated data, because this makes it more
explicit which data changed. It also supports the case when there is no
new version of the data to see, such as when you delete something. This
may also be helpful in making the user realise that they have made a
permanent change when they did not think they had.

image:features-successmessage.png[Success message in LinkedIn]

For example, http://www.linkedin.com/[LinkedIn] shows this success
message after you send an invitation to someone.

=== Fewer required fields

Allow users to enter incomplete data, so that missing data does not
break the system. Remind the user that the data is incomplete; ask
nicely for the rest.

You may want users to enter certain information, but you probably cannot
force them to. People are likely to be cleverer than your software, and
if users just type 'unknown' into required fields, you have gained
nothing other than annoyed users. Besides, some users will always be
able to avoid entering data in your software by simply not using it.

Instead, let your users input incomplete information, so they can go to
lunch without finishing a data-entry task, and make sure your software
can handle this case.

=== Data input validation

Handle typos by validating input data; show a validation error for
user-entered data that could not possibly be correct. Be careful not to
be too strict.

It is usually a good idea not to be over-zealous with input validation.
It is a good idea to reject obviously wrong values, because there are
some mistakes that you can spot. For example, if some enters '197' as
their year of birth (or their age) then you can be sure that this was
not intentional.

On the other hand, there is probably always someone with an address or
name format that you did not expect, and they are likely to be annoyed
if you reject their input. For example, http://37signals.com/[37signals]
staff were not impressed by the error
http://www.37signals.com/svn/posts/337-screens-around-town-zune-php-developers-network-planet-argon-and-amex["Your
Employer Name cannot contain any numbers"]:

image:features-inputvalidation.png[Over-zealous input validation,
American Express]

Draconian validation may seem justified in the name of data quality, but
even if it does achieve that it will probably do so at the price of
having far less data in the first place.

=== Data validation warnings

When displaying data, warn the user about likely problems or gaps in the
data.

If you allow incomplete data, then you may need to warn the user about
the consequences. For example, an Amazon wish-list without a delivery
address shows the warning _'Please enter a delivery address so that
items on this list can be bought by others and sent to you.'_ This is
helpful for the list of presents that friends and family can buy me, but
I do not want my fans to buy me computer books that my employer will pay
for so it would be annoying if an address were required.

image:features-datawarning.png[amazon.com data validation warning]

Data warnings can also add more explanation to how your software works.
Instead of a missing value, you can explain that _'Shipping costs cannot
be calculated until you enter a delivery address'_.

Finally, you can warn the user about inconsistent data, when you do not
know which value is wrong. For example, if the user enters a price of
€100 and VAT (sales tax) of €2000 then one of the amounts has to be
wrong, but it could be either one.

[[integration]]
== Software integration features

People who use software to get a job done, especially business software,
are frequently frustrated that they cannot get data from one system to
another. This day-to-day frustration becomes more serious and even less
welcome in data management applications that lock the data in, making it
hard or impossible to migrate the data to some other software. Data is
more useful when you can do more with it, so data management software is
more useful when you can get the data out.

=== OpenSearch API for queries

Implement the http://www.opensearch.org/[OpenSearch] API so that other
software can perform queries and display the results, including search
interfaces.

For example, Firefox 2 and Internet Explorer 7 can add OpenSearch
providers to their search interface, so you can search the browser's
search field. Alternatively, other web applications could use this and
other APIs in your software to mash-up your data with data from other
applications.

=== iCalendar URLs for date-related data

If your application's data is date-related, then make the data available
in http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICalendar[iCalendar] format, to allow
people to view the data in calendaring software. For example, a time
sheet application could display time spent on a calendar, as illustrated
in link:/2006/04/19/icalendar-feeds[iCalendar feeds using iCal4J].

This is an example of letting people use dedicated desktop applications
to view data in a dedicated user-interface, instead of recreating that
user-interface in your web application.

For example, http://www.apple.com/macosx/features/ical/[iCal], which can
subscribe to an iCalendar feed, has a better calendar user-interface
than the average on-line calendar. http://calendar.google.com/[Google
Calendar], meanwhile, provides a public or private 'calendar address'
that allows you to view calendars in an iCalendar client such as iCal.

=== KML URLs for geographic data

In the same way that iCal has a better calendar user-interface,
http://earth.google.com/[Google Earth] has a better geographical
user-interface. If you have geographic data, generate dynamic
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keyhole_Markup_Language[KML] documents that
people can use to view the data in Google Earth or on a map.

For example, a http://www.tagzania.com/user/hilton/cafe/[Tagzania
category] has a KML icon that provides the same data via KML.

=== Export data to a file

If your data is not a good fit for an XML format for which there are
dedicated applications, such as RSS, OpenSearch and KML, then invent
your own XML mark-up and export your data in that format. You probably
need to do this anyway, to be able to include all of your application's
data.

This makes all sorts of applications possible, not least because you can
transform this XML into any other kind using
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XSLT[XSLT]. This is also the sort of
feature that gives people a warm fuzzy feeling because it protects them
from data lock-in and allows them to make their own back-ups.

=== Import data from a file

Once you have functionality to export your data to a file, allow the
user to _Restore database from back-up_ by uploading a
previously-exported file.

This makes it easy to move data between accounts or servers, and makes
the XML back-up files more useful.

[[collaboration]]
== Collaboration features

Although collaboration is the killer application category for the web,
many web applications simply implement the functionality of single-user
desktop applications and fail to support business activities that
involve multiple people. That is to say, all of them.

=== Comments

Allow logged-in users to post comments on pages that display the
application's key data. Comments do not need to be threaded, but should
include the user's name and the date and time posted. Allow the author
of a comment to delete it. Optionally, make comments editable for their
authors, and for advanced users, support rich-text mark-up such as one
of the many wiki syntaxes. You do not need comments on every kind of
data, just the most significant entity. For example, in Amazon you can
comment on books and other products, but not on authors or publishers.

Comments are simple to implement, but can quickly deliver value in more
than one way. Initially, comments are a useful way to let users annotate
application data with unstructured data that would otherwise be lost, or
not made available for other users. Beyond that, comments allow
conversations _about_ the data that are displayed in context. These
conversations can be much more valuable and accessible when centred
around the data like this, with ad-hoc participants, rather than centred
around a particular group of people.

A series of comments about a software bug in a bug tracker like
http://www.atlassian.com/software/jira/[JIRA] is always in the context
of a particular bug, unlike conversation in a discussion forum. Even
worse is e-mail, where people who arrive late to the conversation miss
the beginning. For examples, comments in Lunatech's JIRA on a bug that
would be fixed by an upgrade - the bug is the context:

image:features-comments.png[Comments in JIRA]

=== Tags

Allow users to add simple tags to data in your application, and delete
them again. Then add tag-based data browsing - click a tag to view other
items with the same tag. To keep tags manageable, add functionality to
globally rename or merge tags. Optionally, implement social features:
who added a tag to an item, who else uses a tag, what each person has
tagged.

Tags are the poster child of Web 2.0 and, ironically, the least flashy
and most useful of many of these features. Useful and not-flashy
especially applies to http://del.icio.us/[del.icio.us] which is the best
source of ideas for how to use tags. For example, tags on
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jonathanmarks/165128804/[a photo in
Flickr]:

image:features-tags.png[Tags in Flickr]

However, tags are actually more interesting when you start tagging
structured data, rather than just web pages via del.icio.us. By tagging
structured data you are adding semi-structured meta-data to the
structured data. For example, if your application's database does not
have a status field with 'obsolete' as an allowed value, you could
simply tags items with an 'obsolete' tag. This would let you browse a
list of obsolete items, in a way that would not be possible if you had
merely added a comment that 'this item is obsolete'.

=== Watch for changes - notifications

If the application knows the current user's e-mail address, then give
the user a simple way to 'watch' a particular page or data item, and
notify the user of changes to that data by e-mail.

This is a good example of a useful feature that has a very simple
user-interface - an icon with two states - and does not make the
application more complex to use. Of course, this can require a lot of
effort to implement, but that is another story.

The value of this feature is that in some applications, knowing when
data changes is as useful as being able to find the current data. This
also allows the application itself to become the focus of collaboration,
because people can use the application to tell each other that data has
changed, rather than make the change in some database and manually send
an e-mail. (Or, more likely, just send an e-mail and not update the
database.)

image:features-notifications.png[Enable/disable notifications icons in
Confluence]

For example, if you use a wiki for reference information, you probably
need to know when there is a new version. Each page in
http://www.atlassian.com/software/confluence/[Confluence] shows this
envelope icon in the corner. When you click the inactive version (left),
you start watching the page, the icon changes to the active version
(right) and whenever anyone edits the page you get notified by e-mail.

=== Recent changes

In a multi-user application, show a list of recent activity for all
users on the home page. For a content-based web application this means
new and updated pages, and comments; for a catalogue system, show
updates to catalogue items.

Initially, the recent changes list appears to just mimic the Recent
Documents list in desktop applications, in order to provide a short cut
to data that you were recently working on. However, in a collaboration
application - where multiple users work on the same data - changes made
by other people turn out to be more interesting.

The key benefit of this functionality is that it provides a simple and
immediate answer to questions about how much activity there is, who is
working on what, what has changed recently, and which topics are
currently hot. To show who is doing what, the list entries must indicate
who made the update. To show how much activity there is, and how
recently (e.g. today), entries must indicate their age; ages like '2
hours ago' or '13 days ago' are more useful than dates and times here.
To expose current topics, show a category for each entry.

For example, the http://docs.codehaus.org/[Codehaus Confluence] shows
recent updates like this on its dashboard:

image:features-recentupdates.png[Recent updates in Confluence]

One special case is a wiki: if you cannot customise the home page the
way you can with
http://confluence.atlassian.com/display/CONF25/Customising+the+Dashboard[Confluence's
dashboard], then use the wiki's Recent Updates page as your home page.
By extension, on a company intranet, which should be a wiki, make a list
recent changes half of its home page.

[[user-interface]]
== User-interface features

Despite the inevitable focus on Ajax in the Web 2.0 story, few of the
important web application 2.0 features are purely in the user-interface.

=== Dashboard

Make the application home page, for logged in users, an overview of the
currently most-interesting data. This can be context-sensitive, by being
dependent on the current user and the current date. Consider data
aggregation and high-level statistics, recent changes and the results of
key searches. Optionally, implement a Portlet interface that allows the
user to customise the dashboard by choosing Portlets, also know as
widgets these days.

The idea of a dashboard is that instead of presenting a single view (or
report) on the application's data, it presents many concise summaries of
the data, each addressing a different question. Ideally, these are task
related, so that the dashboard effectively incorporates a to-do list of
application-related tasks. This is related to the kind of content the
front page of a web site has. Interestingly, management dashboards often
have a 'dumbed down toy' image among software developers, which may
explain why they are not more popular in web applications.

For example, JIRA has a sophisticated
http://www.atlassian.com/software/jira/features/report.jsp[dashboard]
that lets you mix and match different Portlets for different views on
your projects. The task-list aspect is that you can view overviews of
outstanding issues of software development projects, such as a the
'number of unresolved bugs per project', or a list of 'issues assigned
to me'.

Similarly, discussion forum software often has a dashboard that shows
lists of most read, recent and unanswered posts.

=== Favourites

In an application where you need to repeatedly return to particular
items that are difficult to find, allow users to add an item/page to
their 'Favourites', and make these items easily accessible from the home
page.

This makes sense in applications where there is a small collection of
'things I am currently working on', while finding those items is
inconvenient or difficult. This may be because the total number of items
is large, because they do not have memorable names or locations to
search for, or because you use the application too infrequently to
remember what they were.

It is usually a bad idea to duplicate standard web browser functionality
in a web application. Provided that your web application has
bookmarkable URLs, you could simply use the browser's bookmarks
functionality instead. However, web browser bookmarks support remains
primitive: it does not let you easily browse just bookmarks in the
current site/application, or sort them with recent additions first.
Another advantage of listing favourites in the application is that the
application can annotate each one with more information, as for the
Recent Changes described above, such as each favourite's category.

Note that favourites can be combined with watching for changes, so that
you get notified of changes to your favourites without a separate
user-interface for turning on notifications.

=== In-line editing

Make some data editable using an Ajax click-to-edit control, such as the
http://dojotoolkit.org/book/dojo-book-0-9/part-2-dijit/form-validation-specialized-input/inline-edit-box[Dojo
Inline Edit Box], rather than using a separate edit page.

This can make it more convenient to make edits to simple data that does
not need a complex interface, such as a short piece of text like a
title. This is not the case, however, when the editing task involves
several attributes at the same time, in which case a separate edit mode
is better. An intermediate possibility, of course, is a group of fields
that all become editable when you click any of them.

For example, when you are logged in to http://www.flickr.com/[Flickr],
you can edit a photo's description simply by clicking it:

http://www.flickr.com/photos/peterhilton/286597393/[image:features-editinplace.jpg[In-line
editing on Flickr]]

