= Business Class or Economy?
hilton
v1.0, 2007-01-31
:title: Business Class or Economy?
:tags: [opinion]


On a recent project, I misjudged the customer's non-functional
requirements: a more polished result turned out to be more important
than time to market, so we had to add an extra round of enhancements
before the first release. I now realise what I forgot to ask - *do you
want expensive software?*" 

image:../media/2007-01-31-business-class-or-economy/business-class.jpg[Business class lounge]

I started thinking about this recently when
http://keith.harrison-broninski.info/[Keith Harrison-Broninski] gave an
excellent talk at link:/2006/12/22/javapolis-2006[JavaPolis 2006]. He
made the point that programmers tend to be very cost-conscious, looking
for faster techniques and frameworks that result in less code. In this
effort to increase engineering efficiency, he explained, programmers
easily miss the situations when price is less important than producing
software that meets people's needs. This is why business people are less
cost-conscious. After all, he went on, 'business people travel business
class'.

Business class flights are a good comparison, because I suspect that
many programmers do not understand the value of a flight that may cost
the same as an economy flight plus the cost of the latest development
workstation. Aside from the question of whether business class flights
are _good value_, business class passengers get significant benefits
from flexible tickets, quiet and comfortable airport lounges to work and
network in, and the opportunity to arrive somewhere still presentable
enough to go straight to a meeting. Programmers, meanwhile, just want
more tangible things like twice as much memory in their PCs, twice as
many pixels on-screen and twice as much desk space.

This is why I suspect that business people usually want what a
programmer would see as 'expensive software'. In web application terms,
this means implementing things like:

* input validation that warns people of likely mistakes, without
restricting how they use the system by refusing to accept data
* user-interaction design principles such as
https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/AppleHIGuidelines/HIPrinciples/HIPrinciples.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP30000353-TPXREF107[forgiveness],
so that changes can be reversed and human mistakes corrected
* supporting different ways of working, with more than one way to do
something, such as both search and browse-based navigation
* interaction with other tools, adding capabilities rather than reducing
options, as with data import and export in multiple formats
* performance.

These are things that you will not retrofit later on, because the
economics will be wrong - it will seem like too big a job.

Not all software needs to be expensive: sometimes cheaper and sooner
really is better, although these may only be the times when you are
really building a prototype. What matters is whether you continue using
the software in the future, which is how prototypes become production
systems. In other words, sometimes your 'prototype' is not really a
prototype at all, you should design it as the first iteration of a
production system, rather than treated as a temporary solution. Lifetime
is relevant because 'People remember the quality long after they've
forgotten the price. Unless you try to rip them off.'
(http://www.gapingvoid.com/Moveable_Type/archives/003642.html[gapingvoid]).

The immediate consequence of more expensive software is that it takes
longer to implement features, or that you build fewer of them. Feature
simplicity is getting plenty of press these days, with
http://www.37signals.com/[37Signals] recommending that you
http://gettingreal.37signals.com/ch02_Build_Less.php[Build Less] and
http://www.37signals.com/svn/posts/187-apple-phone-my-prediction[execute
on the basics beautifully] as Apple have done with the iPod, to
successfully compete with the feature-rich competition.

The commercial appeal of these successful examples is that they
de-commoditise established functionality by attributing added value to
design innovation and better execution, instead of the feature set,
which means more profitable market differentiation. The catch is that
you cannot actually ask your customer whether they want expensive
software, air-travel analogies notwithstanding, because they will have
no idea what you mean. In the absence of a sensible way of asking, you
will have to rely on having a feel for how price-conscious your customer
really is, so that you know how 'expensive' each feature will have to be
in order to be good enough.

In the end, if your design is good enough to show how expensive software
could be better, and your implementation has polish, then you should pay
more attention to software's non-functional requirements.

_Photo: https://www.flickr.com/photos/21065622@N08/4899883747/[Matt @
PEK]_
