--- layout: article drupal-format: Wordpress format title: "Seam is the
new Struts" tags: Java opinion Seam web-applications author: Peter
Hilton summary: "After Nicolas and I said that
‘[Seam](http://seamframework.org/) is the next Struts’ in our [JavaPolis
presentation](/2007/12/14/javapolis-2007-seam),
[Max](http://in.relation.to/Bloggers/Max) told us that
‘[Gavin](http://in.relation.to/Bloggers/Gavin) will hate that’, which is
funny because of how it takes our statement out of context. This article
is the context." ---

image:seam-is-the-new-struts.png[Seam is the new Struts]

When we say that Seam is the new Struts, we mean that Seam will take
over Struts’ position as the default choice for Java web applications.
This is only going to happen because Seam is so different to Struts -
enough of a revolution to topple Struts from its previously unassailable
position of popularity.

Struts 1.x, which this article is about, has been a wildly popular Java
web application framework for years. In fact, Struts became so popular
that it is easy to use Google to solve Struts problems, which has meant
that the alternatives would be harder to learn and use, despite whatever
other advantages they may have had, such as being better technology.

[[s1]]
== Struts has outlived its usefulness

Since then, incremental improvements to competing web application
frameworks have given way to entirely more sophisticated frameworks.
Improvements in recent years both focus on improvements that eliminate
previous annoyances, and replacements for whole technologies. The next
generation of frameworks have a component-based model that abstracts
away the HTTP API, the ability to use an application’s model classes for
HTML form data, view definition mark-up that improves on JavaServer
Pages, and integration between application layers using dependency
injection.

Meanwhile, there are so many good Java libraries that implement useful
functionality, that integrating libraries has become a more significant
part of web application development than it was a few years ago. Part of
this library-use expansion has been the increase in what Java EE covers,
which matters because libraries that implement an official Java EE API
are more respectable, especially in corporate IT and because more people
are involved via the
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Community_Process[Java Community
Process]. This is why JavaServer Faces (JSF) is already popular, and why
its eventual success is inevitable, despite its initial design flaws.

Seam is one of several frameworks, including
http://tapestry.apache.org/[Tapestry] and
http://wicket.apache.org/[Wicket], that offer a component-based approach
to web application development. Technically, there are differences but
they will not determine eventual popularity. Note that ‘Struts 2’,
another of the competing frameworks, is really
http://www.opensymphony.com/webwork/[WebWork], which is significantly
different to Struts 1.x.

Spring goes beyond providing a better view layer framework, by making it
easy to integrate the view layer with back-end components such as a
Hibernate data access layer. Spring provides additional classes that
provide easy access to the Hibernate API from within Spring’s component
model. In this sense, Seam follows Spring’s lead by integrating Java
EE’s JSF view layer with its EJB model layer, making it far simpler to
build real-world applications.

[[s2]]
== Why Seam is the new Struts

The first sense in which Seam is the new Struts is that Seam has
replaced Struts for most web application projects here at Lunatech
Research. In 2006 there were enough interesting alternatives that we
decided not to start any new applications with Struts, so we had to
choose its replacement. the result of the competition was not conclusive
at the time, but we decided to use Seam for our next project. Seam has
two killer features, from our point of view: Facelets’ approach to
defining views as well-formed XHTML (shared by Tapestry and Wicket) and
Enterprise Java Beans 3 (EJB3) integration.

A year on, almost all of our initial problems and complaints have been
resolved, we have two products now using Seam, and it is increasingly
unlikely that a new project will use something else. So, where Struts
was the default framework at Lunatech, Seam is the new Struts.

[[s3]]
== Why Seam might be your new Struts

Looking beyond our own organisation, we are certainly curious to know
how popular Seam is globally, not least because popularity is good for
more and better documentation, books, tutorials and Google-aided
solutions to problems. In the absence of any real data on popularity,
however, we shall have to rely on pure speculation.

Seam’s integration of JSF, EJB3, Hibernate and
http://java.sun.com/javase/technologies/security/[JAAS] make it a
natural choice for developers who are using those technologies,
especially given Seam’s improvements, such as annotations that you can
use instead of XML configuration. The same applies, of course, to the
other libraries that are integrated, such as
http://www.lowagie.com/iText/[iText]. For integrated libraries, Seam
provides some combination of annotations that replace libraries’ XML
configurations, Seam components that allow you to use dependency
injection to access library classes, and JSF components for use in
views.

It turns out be be convenient that a Seam release includes compatible
versions of many other libraries. In a way, the same thing has happened
with Eclipse plug-ins. The de-facto set of plug-ins for Java web
application development is now so big that it is simply easier to avoid
version management issues by using a combined download and use one of
the annual
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eclipse_%28software%29#Simultaneous_releases[simultaneous
releases].

Another aspect of Seam that will stimulate mass adoption is that it does
not prescribe one true coding style, architecture or pattern, which will
allow more people to fit it to their tastes or needs. For example, a
‘backing bean’ can be an EJB or a POJO, and you can have one per page or
share them between views.

[[s4]]
== Seam’s future

The future is, of course, uncertain but Seam currently has the
ingredients of future Struts-like success: compelling web application
framework technology improvements, integration with the evolving Java EE
platform, Java Community Process involvement, high-quality
documentation, a high-traffic users’ forum, the commitment of smart
developers who get things done and, with the recent launch of the
http://seamframework.org/[seamframework.org] web site, its own home -
symbolic independence from its corporate sponsors.

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
