--- layout: article drupal-format: Wordpress format title: "XML and
Namespaces" tags: XML author: Bart Schuller summary: "This article
explains namespaces in XML: when to use namespaces, and how to declare a
namespace." ---

When you see a piece of XML like this:

[source,literal-block]
----
<foo:bar xmlns:foo="http://foo.example.com/2008/foo">
  <foo:baz mumble="1"/>
</foo:bar>
----

it is using a namespace.

== History

http://www.xml.com/axml/axml.html[XML 1.0] itself doesn't define a
namespace mechanism, although it does already reserve the colon for
future namespace use. It also reserves names starting with the letters
X, M and L in any case for official use in future specifications. The
minimal conformance requirement for an XML document is that it is
_well-formed_. The other side of the coin is that anything that's not
well-formed is _not_ an XML document, whatever the sender may tell you.

http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml-names/[Namespaces in XML] became a W3C
recommendation in 1999, a year after XML 1.0. It is an optional addition
to XML.

== Purpose

The purpose of namespaces is to separate different uses of the same
names. For example, you may have a list of people with element names
like `<name>` and `<address>`, and I can have a list of computers with
element names like `<hostname>` and `<address>` (for IP-addresses). To
unambiguously point to my meaning of `<address>` I can introduce a
namespace.

Even if the names don't overlap exactly, namespaces serve to separate
different vocabularies.

== Nature

An XML namespace is a http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt[URI]
reference (I'll use URI for short) and you can make them up any way you
want. However, because we wanted to separate my element's names from
yours, it makes sense to use URIs that point to your own organisation. A
first stab at my namespace URI could be `mailto:computerss@example.com`
but notice that it contains very little information about what it
represents. It is also hard to find out what it means, except perhaps by
sending a mail to the address. The same problem exists for URIs with the
`file:` and `urn:` schemes. As a best practice, use `http:` URLs and try
to maintain some documentation at that address. So, we'll go for
`http://namespaces.example.com/2008/computers` instead.

== Notation

URI references can get pretty long, so if every element and attribute in
a namespace would suddenly be preceded by the URI, then the size of your
XML documents would explode. That is why the elements themselves use
something shorter called a _namespace prefix_, which is declared using a
_namespace declaration_. The idea is that URI references ensure global
uniqueness, while prefixes are enough to ensure local uniqueness within
a document, or even a part of a document. Here is an example of a
namespace declaration:

[cols=",",options="header",]
|===
|Term |Example
|namespace declaration |`xmlns:foo="http://foo.example.com/2008/foo"`
|namespace |`http://foo.example.com/2008/foo`
|namespace prefix |`foo`
|===

Notice that it looks like it is just an attribute with the funny name
`xmlns:foo`, but since it starts with the letters xml and it contains a
colon, it can't be a normal attribute. What it does is make `foo` a
shorthand for `http://foo.example.com/2008/foo` inside the current
element and its children. This shorthand can be used on element names,
like so `<foo:bar/>` and on attribute names, like so `foo:baz="1"`. Both
the `bar` element and the `baz` attribute are said to be in the
`http://foo.example.com/2008/foo` namespace, but you'll mostly
abbreviate that to just _the foo namespace_.

== Next episode

This is part one in a series of articles about XML for programmers. In
the next parts, we will look at the available tools for working with XML
and namespaces.

_Bart Schuller is a Senior Software Engineer and Troubleshooter at
Lunatech Research._
