= Benelux JBoss User Group, 29 February 2008
hilton
v1.0, 2008-01-17
:title: Benelux JBoss User Group, 29 February 2008
:tags: [java,jboss,jbug,event]

The third JBoss Benelux User Group event will be in Rotterdam, on 29
February 2008. This event will be a bit different: the JBoss User Group
is growing and our previous meeting room has become too small, so we
arranged something special this time: we will meet in Paddy Murphy's
Irish Pub in Rotterdam. https://blog.lunatech.com/2008-03-03-jbug-2008-02-photos[Photos of the
event] are now on-line.

*Date:* Friday, 29 February 2008

*Time:* Arrive 1430-1530, presentations start 1530, finish 1900-1930.

*Location:* http://www.paddymurphys.nl/[Paddy Murphy's], Rodezand 15,
3011 AM, Rotterdam
(http://maps.google.com/maps?q=paddy+murphys,rotterdam[map])

image:jbug-2008-02-paddys.jpg[Paddy Murphyâ€™s]

*Programme:* The program will begin with 'JBoss Seam in Action'.
http://in.relation.to/Bloggers/Pete[Pete Muir], Seam Core Developer,
will introduce Seam, its contextual programming model and its tight
integration with other frameworks such as Hibernate, jBPM (business
process modelling) and RichFaces.

In the second presentation, Tom Baeyens, founder and lead for JBoss
jBPM, will introduce the latest developments in the Process Virtual
Machine project.

In the third presentation, Bart Schuller and Daan Hoogenboezem, from
Lunatech Research, will explain what it was like getting started with
jBPM on a real commercial project: what its learning curve is, and our
practical experiences.

Meanwhile, Paddy Murphy's have a selection of beer to help you
concentrate on every presentation (we recommend the Murphy's). Better
yet, JBoss has kindly agreed to sponsor the event and pay the bar tab.

http://www.lunatech-research.com/event/register/jbug3[Register] for this
JBUG event if you would like to attend.
