--- author: Michael Pentowski tags: ventures published: true title:
Kalydo bringing MMO games to Social Networks type: post layout: article
meta: \{} status: publish summary: Game Entertainment Europe, publisher
of Online games and Eximion, developer of the Kalydo 3D browser game
platform have signed an agreement to bring downloadable MMO games to
Social Networks such as Facebook and Netlog. ---

http://kalydo.blogspot.com/2009/11/gee-and-kalydo-bring-mmo-games-to.html

The first game that will be launched is http://www.hovorun.com[Hovorun],
a casual multi player racing game based in the Mario Kart theme. The
planning is to launch the first browser version of this game to social
networks such as Hyves and Netlog.

Existing downloadable MMO games will be seamlessly ported so users can
start and play these games in a Web browser. When ready, the online
games will be offered to millions of users in Social Networks using
Kalydo. With this cooperation both companies follow the success of other
Social Games like Restaurant City, Mafia Wars and Farm Ville, where
users don’t have to register, download and install games. Also it is
very easy to share the game and their game results with many of their
friends.

____
“For this cooperation GEE will focus on the selection of the best Online
Games from the enormous offering of downloadable MMO games we have. We
will localize and promote the games but we can leave the transformation
to a browser based game and the distribution to the Social Networks to
Eximion. An excellent combination.” according to Richard van Barneveld,
CEO of Game Entertainment Europe.
____

____
“We want to show the world its now perfectly possible to run large MMO
games from the browser. Combining smart engineering, bleeding edge
technology such as cloud computing we bring these games to the browser,
omitting the need of a large download and installation. Together with
Game Entertainment Europe we make the first MMO games widely accessible
to a huge group of people on the social networks.” says Doki Tops – CEO
at Kalydo
____
