--- layout: article drupal-format: Full HTML title: "VisibleLogistics -
Supply Chain Visibility SaaS" tags: SaaS product-development case-study
author: Peter Hilton summary: "Lunatech Research is the technology team
behind [BitLogistics](http://bitlogistics.com/), and have developed
their [VisibleLogistics](http://www.visiblelogistics.com/) platform - a
SaaS supply chain management solution. Lunatech implemented
VisibleLogistics using a cutting-edge open-source technology stack,
based on the [Java Enterprise
platform](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_ee). The project team,
distributed across three countries, used an agile software development
approach and Internet-based collaboration tools to maximise progress
while controlling risk and costs." ---

The data model is flexible enough to fit a wide variety of business
processes and different interpretations of common concepts. The
technology advantage extends from the software itself to its
architecture and development process. A plug-in architecture allows us
to customise deployment for larger organisations, without affecting the
core application software or suffering the development team inefficiency
of maintaining parallel versions. Lunatech also provides custom
development services to large enterprises, such as the
http://www.defenselink.mil/[United States Department of Defense], who
deployed their own customised version in their secure Internet
environment.
