--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Java native libraries using JNA" tags: author: Bart
Schuller summary: "Java and native code: most Java programmers have a
strong dislike for it: it kills portability, it is messy and a lot of
hassle. Then again: when you need it, you need it. Luckily JNA can make
the experience less painful, if not outright enjoyable. In this article
I will introduce [JNA](https://jna.dev.java.net/) and companion tool
jnaerator, as well as some tricks of my own involving object identity
and loose coupling." ---

== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-WhatisJNA%3F]####What is JNA?

The problem with native code is: having to build it. These days,
installing most libraries is taken care of by your Linux distribution,
MacPorts, or the developers distributing Windows DLLs. Installation is
easy, but custom development is still hard: you have to have a C
compiler at hand, figure out all kinds of flags and if you're really
unlucky also exotic build systems. When you use JNI, this is what you
have to deal with.

Wouldn't it be nice if all you had to do is install the resulting binary
(meaning a `.dll`, `.so` or `.dylib` file) and use that directly from
Java? That is exactly what JNA makes possible. It does away with
compilation of bridging code using a C compiler. Instead, it generates
this code on the fly. All you have to do is write a Java interface
describing the C functions you would like to call, and JNA will hand you
an implementation which actually does it. See the example on the
https://jna.dev.java.net/[JNA home page] for details.

That leaves you with the boring job of going through the C API that you
want to use and write your Java interface, including laying out C
structures as Java classes.

== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-Aneveneasierway]####An even easier way

Boring, mechanical work: those words sound like a challenge to a
programmer. The http://code.google.com/p/jnaerator/[jnaerator] project
steps up to the challenge: it is a tool which takes the C header files
for a library and spits out the Java interface for use with JNA.
Jnaerator also includes its own copy of JNA, so with just one download
or http://code.google.com/p/jnaerator/wiki/Maven[Maven dependency],
you're all set.

It is worth noting that some common libraries, like the MacOSX
frameworks and Mono/.NET have been converted and fine-tuned already and
are available from the
http://code.google.com/p/nativelibs4java/[nativelibs4java] project.

Jnaerator has different flavours of code it can generate. I opted for
the new JNA Direct Mapping mode, which generates a Java class instead of
an interface, with static methods which have the `native` modifier and
no body, like this:

\{% highlight java %}public static native int dInitODE2(int
uiInitFlags);\{% endhighlight %}

This is the first function to call in a program which uses the
http://www.ode.org/[ODE] (Open Dynamics Engine), the library which I'm
wrapping.

== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-CreatingagoodJavaAPI]####Creating a good Java API

Now that you have easy access to your C library, you are still not done.
Because the generated glue code is inherently procedural in nature, it
is up to you to layer some Object-Oriented magic on top.

Most of the time, the library will show signs of an OO design already,
but using functions instead of methods. You will see a number of
functions all taking a particular type as the first parameter. This type
is often a pointer to some structure, which is used as a kind of handle
for the objects that the library is modeling.

Here is a short example from ODE again:

\{% highlight java %}// This class was generated by jnaerator public
class OdeLibrary implements com.sun.jna.Library \{ // … public static
native DWorld dWorldCreate(); public static native void
dWorldDestroy(DWorld world); public static native void
dWorldSetGravity(DWorld world, double x, double y, double z); // … }\{%
endhighlight %}

Without delving into the specifics of ODE, what you see here are several
static methods that do things with a _DWorld_ object. If we want to make
this more OO, we should move the methods related to _DWorld_ to the
`DWorld` class itself. Of course, we can't actually move them, because
these static native methods are the only ones that actually work, but we
can add new methods to _DWorld_ which call the static ones in
`OdeLibrary`. +
Luckily for us, jnaerator has already created the `DWorld` class, we
just need to add some methods to it.

Here's what DWorld looks like. It started out as a generated class with
just two constructors, but I've added a static method and two object
methods:

\{% highlight java %}import static org.smop.odejna.OdeLibrary.*; public
class DWorld extends com.sun.jna.PointerType \{ // generated public
DWorld(com.sun.jna.Pointer pointer) \{ super(pointer); } public DWorld()
\{ super(); } // hand coded public static DWorld create() \{ return
dWorldCreate(); } public void destroy() \{ dWorldDestroy(this); } public
void setGravity(double x, double y, double z) \{ dWorldSetGravity(this,
x, y, z); } }\{% endhighlight %}

The static import makes all the functions available and it becomes very
easy to write your methods, they mostly just forward to the functions.

How this works is: every opaque pointer type in C gets translated to a
class extending `PointerType`. You are allowed to subclass these classes
and change the signatures in the big JNA class to use them.

In ODE, some datatypes aren't explicitly given their own C types, so
they aren't given distinct java types either. However, we can fix that.

Here's an example, in `OdeLibrary`:

\{% highlight java %}public static native DJoint dJointCreateBall(DWorld
w, DJointGroup jg); public static native DJoint dJointCreateHinge(DWorld
w, DJointGroup jg); public static native int dJointIsEnabled(DJoint j);
public static native void dJointSetBallAnchor(DJoint j, double x, double
y, double z); public static native void dJointSetHingeAnchor(DJoint j,
double x, double y, double z);\{% endhighlight %}

It appears from these functions that there are operations which are
applicable to every _DJoint_ and then some that are specific to joints
of specific types:

\{% highlight java %}public static void main(String[] args) \{ // …
DJoint ball = dJointCreateBall(world, null); int enabled =
dJointIsEnabled(ball); // ok, applicable to any joint
dJointSetBallAnchor(ball, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0); // ok, applicable to ball
joints dJointSetHingeAnchor(ball, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0); // ERROR: C code will
complain }\{% endhighlight %}

We can introduce two subtypes of `DJoint` and have the types enforce the
correct use of each method. JNA will still work if you replace some
types with a subclass:

\{% highlight java %}public class DBallJoint extends DJoint \{ } public
class DHingeJoint extends DJoint \{ } public class OdeLibrary implements
com.sun.jna.Library \{ // … public static native DBallJoint
dJointCreateBall(DWorld w, DJointGroup jg); public static native
DHingeJoint dJointCreateHinge(DWorld w, DJointGroup jg); public static
native int dJointIsEnabled(DJoint j); public static native void
dJointSetBallAnchor(DBallJoint j, double x, double y, double z); public
static native void dJointSetHingeAnchor(DHingeJoint j, double x, double
y, double z); }\{% endhighlight %}

You would then make it more OO like so:

\{% highlight java %}public class DJoint extends PointerType \{ // …
public boolean isEnabled() \{ return dJointIsEnabled(this) != 0; } }
public class DBallJoint extends DJoint \{ // … public static DBallJoint
create(DWorld w, DJointGroup jg) \{ return dJointCreateBall(w, jg); }
public void setAnchor(double x, double y, double z) \{
dJointSetBallAnchor(this, double x, double y, double z); } } public
class DHingeJoint extends DJoint \{ // … public static DHingeJoint
create(DWorld w, DJointGroup jg) \{ return dJointCreateHinge(w, jg); }
public void setAnchor(double x, double y, double z) \{
dJointSetHingeAnchor(this, double x, double y, double z); } } public
class Test \{ public static void main(String[] args) \{ // … DBallJoint
ball = DBallJoint.create(world, null); boolean enabled =
ball.isEnabled(); // applicable to any joint ball.setAnchor(0.0, 0.0,
0.0); // will call dJointSetBallAnchor() } }\{% endhighlight %}

== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-Twochallenges]####Two challenges

=== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-Objectidentity]####Object identity

After you've enthusiastically enhanced some classes, you hit a snag. You
have added some of your own fields to a class and you find that
sometimes the fields lose their values. What is going on?

For instance, if `company` is a wrapped C object and you call
`company.setDirector(dilbert)` and then later call
`company.getDirector()`, the object you get back is not the same as the
one you put in. Instead, each time a C function returns one of your
objects, you get a fresh one created using the default constructor and
with just the `pointer` field set to the underlying C pointer.

If only we could remember our instances and make the library look them
up when asked to return one…

=== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-Loosecoupling]####Loose coupling

A second problem becomes apparent once you step back and look at your
design from a distance: You wanted to create something beautiful, a
wrapped library will have to be part of that, but it turns out to be a
good thing in itself as well. Only: for your current project you just
added some very specific fields and behavior to the wrapped classes,
destroying any hope of being able to reuse the library. How can we
extend the library in such a way that the extensions can be distributed
separately from the generic wrapped library?

=== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-Onesolution]####One solution

The key to the solution to both challenges is the

\{% highlight java %}public Object fromNative(Object nativeValue,
FromNativeContext ctx)\{% endhighlight %}

method in `PointerType` (the base class of our custom classes). The
https://jna.dev.java.net/javadoc/com/sun/jna/PointerType.html[javadoc]
explains:

____
The default implementation simply creates a new instance of the class
and assigns its pointer field. Override if you need different behavior,
such as ensuring a single `PointerType` instance for each unique
`Pointer` value, or instantiating a different `PointerType` subclass.
____

Aha! the creators of JNA foresaw our needs. In fact, the way I see it,
these are such universal needs, there should be a universal way of
satisfying them.

== [#JavanativelibrariesusingJNA-ExtendablePointerType]####ExtendablePointerType

Just as easily said as done, I came up with a universal subclass of
`PointerType` which your classes should inherit from instead. It will
maintain a weak map of weak references so it can return instances that
have been created earlier (you will have to prevent them from getting
garbage collected yourself, the alternative was to pile them up
indefinitely). +
The second feature it has is that you can customize which classes it
creates. Let's say your current project needs some extra fields in the
`DBallJoint` class but you don't need them in the generic ODE library.
What you can do is create a subclass `MyBallJoint extends DBallJoint`
and then somewhere in your program register that when the API needs the
one, it should instead use the other:

\{% highlight java
%}ExtendablePointerType.registerSubclass(DBallJoint.class,
MyBallJoint.class);\{% endhighlight %}

The original static native methods will now return your subclass, but of
course the signature hasn't changed, so you will need to use casts. But
as you move from procedural to OO style, it is easy to hide the casts
inside the forwarding methods.

That is really all you need to know to use it, so to end this article,
I'll present the class in full.

Have fun hacking, go wrap some native code the easy way!

....
package org.smop.jna;

import java.lang.ref.WeakReference;
import java.util.HashMap;
import java.util.Map;
import java.util.WeakHashMap;

import com.sun.jna.FromNativeContext;
import com.sun.jna.Pointer;
import com.sun.jna.PointerType;

/**
 * Mapper from C to Java with custom subclasses and lasting identity.
 */
public class ExtendablePointerType extends PointerType {
    private static Map<Class<? extends PointerType>, Class<? extends PointerType>> subclassMap =
        new HashMap<Class<? extends PointerType>, Class<? extends PointerType>>();
    private static Map<Pointer, WeakReference<PointerType>> instances = new WeakHashMap<Pointer, WeakReference<PointerType>>();

    public static void registerSubclass(Class<? extends PointerType> clazz,
            Class<? extends PointerType> subclazz) {
        subclassMap.put(clazz, subclazz);
    }

    @Override
    public Object fromNative(Object nativeValue, FromNativeContext ctx) {
        // Always pass along null pointer values
        if (nativeValue == null) {
            return null;
        }
        PointerType res;

        // do we have an existing instance?
        WeakReference<PointerType> weakref = instances.get(nativeValue);
        if (weakref != null) {
            res = weakref.get();
            if (res != null)
                return res;
        }

        // determine target type
        @SuppressWarnings("unchecked")
        Class<? extends PointerType> targetType = ctx.getTargetType();
        if (subclassMap.containsKey(targetType))
            targetType = subclassMap.get(targetType);

        // Create new instance
        try {
            res = targetType.newInstance();
        } catch (InstantiationException e) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Can't instantiate "
                    + ctx.getTargetType(), e);
        } catch (IllegalAccessException e) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Not allowed to instantiate "
                    + ctx.getTargetType(), e);
        }
        res.setPointer((Pointer) nativeValue);

        // Store instance
        instances.put((Pointer) nativeValue,
                new WeakReference<PointerType>(res));

        return res;
    }
}
....
