--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Chrimble cocktail" tags: fun author: Peter Hilton
summary: "This year's festive period led to a more seasonal kind of
design task: create a cocktail for Chrimbletide. Here is the recipe."
---

[[Ingredients]]
== Ingredients

Choosing ingredients for a cocktail, in common with many creative
activities, is all about achieving various kinds of balance - not too
sour or sweet, for example. Not this time. Instead, the Chrimble
cocktail is an unrestrained blend of several layers of sweet and
sweeter:

* 1 measure Harvey's http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bristol_Cream[Bristol
Cream] - or other 'cream' (i.e. sweet) sherry
* ½ measure http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chocolate_liqueur[chocolate
liqueur] - e.g. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DeKuyper[De Kuyper] Crème
de Cacao dark
* ½ measure
http://www.torres.es/eng/asp/nv_ficha.asp?Ficha=producto&Cod=33[Torres
10] - or other sweet rich brandy
* dash of http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cointreau[Cointreau]

Essentially, each ingredient is the richest and sweetest version of the
drink, except for the chocolate liqueur, which does not come in a
non-sickly version. For example, a less sweet
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_sec[triple-sec] is normally a more
useful orange liqueur in cocktails, such as a margarita.

Note that these quantities make a serving that is slightly too large.
However, that leaves plenty of scope for the barman to check the recipe
before pouring.

[[Method]]
== Method

Add the ingredients to a cocktail shaker, shake and strain. It is
generally considered sociable to make four at a time.

Shaking a cocktail with ice cubes makes the mixture very cold, which is
ideal with sweet and sticky ingredients. However, this makes the drink
cloudy, which we shall consider a feature rather than a bug; a
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martini_(cocktail)[Martini] is normally
stirred so that it remains clear. Mr Bond, one supposes, prefers it
extra cold.

[[Serving]]
== Serving

Take a sherry glass, rim the edge with lemon juice, and dip the rim in a
layer of http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Icing_sugar[icing sugar]. Add half
a thin slice of lemon to the glass, pour and serve.

To rim the glass, you can just use the the lemon slice before adding it
to the glass. If you do not rim the glass, the sugar does not stick.

Optionally, you can use frosted glasses - put the glasses in the freezer
for at least half an hour before use.

[[Technicaldesignnote]]
== Technical design note

This not an entirely functional recipe: there are likely to be
side-effects.

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
