= Decision service architecture with JBoss Rules
PeterHilton
v1.0, 2009-12-10
:title: Decision service architecture with JBoss Rules
:tags: [java,drools]

This article describes an
architecture for implementing a decision service with http://www.jboss.org/drools/[JBoss
Rules], a http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_rules_engine[business rules
engine]. This is a
high-level description, without code, for architects who are considering
using JBoss Rules or implementing a decision service.

This article is part 1 of a series:

. Decision service architecture with JBoss Rules - this article
. link:/2009/12/28/decision-service-business-rules-jboss-rules[Decision
service business rules in JBoss Rules] - how to implement the decision
service logic
. link:/2010/01/04/how-build-decision-service-using-jboss-rules-execution-server[How
to build a decision service using JBoss Rules Execution Server] - how to
get this working, with example rules - a RESTful decision service with
no Java code required.

[[Decisionservices]]
== Decision services

A decision service is some kind of software component that acts as a
business logic black box: other parts of a system present it with data,
it makes potentially-complex business 'decisions' and returns some
result. Typically, this is a component of a
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service-oriented_architecture[service-oriented
architecture] that encapsulates the business logic required to make
business decisions, and which is called by applications that do not
contain this logic themselves. In such an architecture, this
communication typically uses web services.

image:decision-service-architecture-1.png[image]

For example, imagine a hypothetical retailer that has point of sale
systems in many locations, as well as a web shop. A decision service
would be useful for calculating which discounts apply to a particular
sale, using rules that could change daily based on time-limited special
offers. (Aren't they always?) The 'checkout' system would send details
of the order to the decision service, which would apply business rules
and calculate a result in the form of a percentage discount.

Another example is product configuration, such as a web site that allows
you to build your own PC by choosing components such as motherboard,
processor, graphics card and enclosure (case). A user-interface would
allow the buyer to make selections, the business rules would work out
which combinations are valid, and tell the user-interface which options
to disable. For example, if you select a powerful graphics card with its
own fan, then you cannot select the smallest PC enclosure: only a larger
tower has room.

Note that this is about accessing remote _business logic_ rather than
accessing remote data, such as a particular customer's purchase history.

[[JBossRules]]
== JBoss Rules

http://www.jboss.org/drools/[JBoss Rules] (also known as Drools), part
of the http://www.jboss.com/products/platforms/brms/[JBoss Enterprise
Business Rules Management System], is a business rules platform built
around a http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_rules_engine[rules
engine]. There are many different usage scenarios for this kind of
platform: building a decision service is perhaps the simplest.

There are several reasons why JBoss Rules is an especially useful
component in a decision service architecture. For example, it can run in
a high-performance stateless mode, for use in a request-response pattern
from multiple simultaneous clients. Secondly, the Drools Rule Language
has a clear syntax for authoring rules, which are the core of the
decision service implementation. Declarative business rules are usually
far easier to read and verify than traditional procedural code. It is
also possible to implement complex business logic as a large number of
small independent rules, which also makes them easier to read and test.

In addition, JBoss Rules provides both an
http://downloads.jboss.com/drools/docs/5.0.1.26597.FINAL/drools-guvnor/html/ch01.html#d0e1095[Execution
Server] that you can use as a simple/prototype decision service out of
the box, as well as a flexible Java API (programming interface) for
integrating the rules engine into your own application.

In this scenario, JBoss Rules is a rules engine in the form of a Java
library. Your decision service accepts web services request and uses the
rules engine's API to execute the business rules.

image:decision-service-architecture-2.png[image]

[[Technicalarchitecture]]
== Technical architecture

JBoss Rules provides an out-of-the-box way to get started with this
architecture, without writing any Java code. The Execution Service is
included in the JBoss Rules distribution as _drools-server-5.0.1.war_ -
a web application that you can run in any Servlet container, such as
Apache Tomcat. This web application provides a default
http://java.sun.com/developer/technicalArticles/WebServices/restful/[RESTful
web services] interface to your business rules, which you write using
the Drools Rule Language.

image:decision-service-architecture-3.png[image]

To use this service, you send data as XML in an HTTP POST request to the
execution server, which takes care of passing the data to the rules
engine, executing the rules, and formatting the results as an XML
response. The Execution Server also supports
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON[JSON] as an alternative to XML.

Either way, this is ideal for calling the decision service from a
non-Java client, such as an
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ajax_(programming)[Ajax] web page or
another programming language.

In this design, JBoss Rules executes the rules using a stateless
session. This means that no state is preserved between requests to the
decision service. Instead, if you repeat the same request, you get the
same response each time, which allows the rules engine to optimise
performance and makes testing far easier.

The Execution Server is just a single Servlet with a fixed data model
for input and output. If you look at the code, it is not difficult to
imagine replacing it with extended functionality and customising it for
your needs.

[[Extendingthearchitecture]]
== Extending the architecture

Once beyond a proof of concept, or an initial version, various kinds of
enhancement are interesting and possible. To have more control over the
external web services API, you can replace the Execution Server with
your own RESTful (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JAX-RS[JAX-RS]) or SOAP
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_API_for_XML_Web_Services[JAX-WS])
interface.

You may also want to improve performance or simplify the API by
embedding the decision service directly as a component in another
application, such as a web application, that will call your Java code
directly.

Or perhaps you want all of the above.

image:decision-service-architecture-4.png[image]

On a recent implementation project with one of our customers, we used
just the far-right path: application uses SOAP API to call decision
service facade.

Either way, you would encapsulate the rules engine API and your rules as
a single service interface or facade class.

[[Domainfactobjectmodel]]
== Domain fact object model

The data model, defined as a Java class model, is the common factor
across the architecture components. You will need a set of JavaBeans
that define this data model for use in several places.

. The classes define an XML representation for sending data across web
services. This is typically based on a mapping from the JavaBeans using
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Architecture_for_XML_Binding[JAXB].
. The classes are used as
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_transfer_object[Data Transfer Objects]
between the decision service's external (web services) interface and the
rules engine.
. Instances of these classes will be used as 'working memory facts' in
the rules session. When the rules execute, the working memory is the set
of data that the rules reason about and modify, consisting of facts,
which are Java objects that each represent some assertion.

In another application, these same JavaBeans may also define a
persistent data model for storing data in a database - typically an
object-relational mapping using
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Persistence_API[JPA]. A decision
service, however, is usually stateless and has no persistent data store
because.

Although in some sense this is necessarily an
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anemic_Domain_Model[Anemic Domain Model],
because the business logic resides in the rules, these need not be
entirely bare JavaBean classes. When writing rules, it is frequently
easier to implement derived data as additional JavaBean properties in
the object model. For example, if a fact JavaBean has a (date) 'start
date' property, it may be more convenient to add a transient Boolean
property for whether the start date is a weekday that rules can refer to
directly, without having to calculate it.

[[Conclusion]]
== Conclusion

A decision service can be an effective way to extract business logic
from multiple applications and system components, in order to reduce
duplication and make testing easier. When implemented using a rules
engine, these rules may be expressed more clearly and concisely, which
makes them easier to read and maintain.

JBoss Rules provides an Execution Server that allows you get started
quickly, either as a proof of concept or in order to implement a basic
decision service without writing any Java code. The same rules can be
accessed using the JBoss Rules Java API, which allows you to embed this
decisions service in a Java application, or to customise the decision
service's external interface by making it into a new Java application
with a Java web-services interface.


