--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "JBoss Rules (Drools) implementation" tags:
case-study Drools author: Peter Hilton summary: "In 2009,
[BBned](http://www.bbned.nl/) hired Lunatech to assist with their first
[JBoss Rules](http://www.jboss.org/drools/) (Drools) implementation.
Lunatech provided a technical expert whose task was to ensure the smooth
introduction of the open-source JBoss Rules product and to reduce
project technical risk. The work included writing technical design
documentation, building part of the software, and coaching BBned's own
staff with the new technology." ---

Lunatech's expert successfully applied JBoss Rules as planned, within
the project constraints, and ensured that BBned's initial lack of
experience with JBoss Rules did not result in technical problems on the
project. In addition, Lunatech performed knowledge transfer to internal
staff so that BBned is able to apply the technology on other projects,
without being dependent on third-party vendors or consultants.

BBned used JBoss Rules to implement a decision service - a component of
a Service-Oriented Architecture that encapsulates the business logic
required to make business decisions, and which is called by applications
that do not contain this logic themselves. This decision service
dynamically validates product configuration options while a customer is
preparing an order for network services, which allows BBned to offer a
flexible range of services rather than limiting customers to fixed
choices.

The http://www.jboss.com/products/platforms/brms/[JBoss Business Rules
Management System] is the ideal technology platform for implementing
this kind of decision service: it provides a mature implementation of a
high-performance rules engine that developers can use to execute
business rules written in the Drools Rule Language. For BBned, this
means that business requirements are implemented as clearly identifiable
independent rules in the decision service, which results in software
that is easier to understand, debug and maintain.

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
