--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Running Lumbermill on OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard" tags:
logging author: Peter Hilton summary:
"[Lumbermill](http://traxel.com/lumbermill/) is a log viewer that useful
when you need to view and filter large quantities of *java.util.logging*
or Log4J logging that uses the `SocketAppender`. Unfortunately,
Lumbermill stopped working on OS X after the Snow Leopard upgrade.
Here's how to get it working again." ---

[[Symptoms]]
== Symptoms

If you start Lumbermill normally, with *java -jar
dist/lib/lumbermill.jar* then there is a problem after you select the
_New Server Mill_ menu option, and enter a port number under _Please
enter the port to listen on_

image:lumbermill-1.png[Lumbermill - attempting to create a New Server
Mill]

â€¦ the window doesn't open - nothing happens. Instead of opening the log
output window, Lumbermill silently fails with the following
NullPointerException (NPE):

....
Exception in thread "AWT-EventQueue-0" java.lang.NullPointerException
    at com.traxel.lumbermill.desk.MillFrameControl.<init>(MillFrameControl.java:98)
    at com.traxel.lumbermill.Mill.<init>(Mill.java:44)
    at com.traxel.lumbermill.ServerMill.<init>(ServerMill.java:42)
    at com.traxel.lumbermill.desk.MillAction$ServerMillAction.getMill(MillAction.java:54)
    at com.traxel.lumbermill.desk.MillAction.actionPerformed(MillAction.java:131)
    at javax.swing.AbstractButton.fireActionPerformed(AbstractButton.java:2028)
    at javax.swing.AbstractButton$Handler.actionPerformed(AbstractButton.java:2351)
    at javax.swing.DefaultButtonModel.fireActionPerformed(DefaultButtonModel.java:387)
    at javax.swing.DefaultButtonModel.setPressed(DefaultButtonModel.java:242)
    at javax.swing.AbstractButton.doClick(AbstractButton.java:389)
    at javax.swing.plaf.basic.BasicMenuItemUI.doClick(BasicMenuItemUI.java:1223)
    at com.apple.laf.AquaMenuItemUI.doClick(AquaMenuItemUI.java:137)
    at javax.swing.plaf.basic.BasicMenuItemUI$Handler.mouseReleased(BasicMenuItemUI.java:1264)
    at java.awt.Component.processMouseEvent(Component.java:6348)
    at javax.swing.JComponent.processMouseEvent(JComponent.java:3255)
    at java.awt.Component.processEvent(Component.java:6113)
    at java.awt.Container.processEvent(Container.java:2085)
    at java.awt.Component.dispatchEventImpl(Component.java:4714)
    at java.awt.Container.dispatchEventImpl(Container.java:2143)
    at java.awt.Component.dispatchEvent(Component.java:4544)
    at java.awt.LightweightDispatcher.retargetMouseEvent(Container.java:4618)
    at java.awt.LightweightDispatcher.processMouseEvent(Container.java:4282)
    at java.awt.LightweightDispatcher.dispatchEvent(Container.java:4212)
    at java.awt.Container.dispatchEventImpl(Container.java:2129)
    at java.awt.Window.dispatchEventImpl(Window.java:2475)
    at java.awt.Component.dispatchEvent(Component.java:4544)
    at java.awt.EventQueue.dispatchEvent(EventQueue.java:635)
    at java.awt.EventDispatchThread.pumpOneEventForFilters(EventDispatchThread.java:296)
    at java.awt.EventDispatchThread.pumpEventsForFilter(EventDispatchThread.java:211)
    at java.awt.EventDispatchThread.pumpEventsForHierarchy(EventDispatchThread.java:201)
    at java.awt.EventDispatchThread.pumpEvents(EventDispatchThread.java:196)
    at java.awt.EventDispatchThread.pumpEvents(EventDispatchThread.java:188)
    at java.awt.EventDispatchThread.run(EventDispatchThread.java:122)
....

[[Cause]]
== Cause

The problem is that Lumbermill tries to use the Aqua look and feel for
Swing, which does not exist any more in the version of Java shipped with
Snow Leopard. This because Aqua is 32-bit code and does not run on the
64-bit Snow Leopard Java runtime.

[[Solution]]
== Solution

The solution is to specify a different Swing look and feel, by setting
the _swing.defaultlaf_ system property on the command line:

*java -Dswing.defaultlaf=javax.swing.plaf.metal.MetalLookAndFeel -jar
dist/lib/lumbermill.jar*

This starts Lumbermill with Swing's 'Metal' look and feel, and the
server mill window now opens normally.

image:lumbermill-2.png[New server window]

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
