--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Play framework meet-up at Devoxx 2010" tags:
playframework author: Peter Hilton summary: "Peter Hilton and Nicolas
Leroux joined thousands of Java developers at [Devoxx
2010](http://devoxx.com/display/Devoxx2K10/Home), for technical talks,
networking and Belgian beer. About 60 people went to our Wednesday
evening for a [Play framework](http://www.playframework.org/) meet-up,
to talk to us about Play (Nicolas and Peter are both committers on the
project), get free drinks and meet other developers." ---

image:devoxx-2010-play-meetup.jpg[About 60 people turned up at the Play
framework meet-up at Axxes Café, sponsored by Lunatech and Zenexity] +
About 60 people turned up at the Play framework meet-up at Axxes Café,
sponsored by Lunatech and Zenexity

[[meetups]]
== Recommended evening meet-ups

*Monday 20:00*:
http://in.relation.to/Bloggers/SeamInfinispanAndArquillianSocialAtDevoxxPlusYourJBossPlanner[Seam,
Infinispan and Arquillian Social],
http://hilton.org.uk/antwerp/kulminator[Kulminator]. The Seam team are a
great crowd that you should definitely meet, and Kulminator is the only
place for serious beer drinkers.

*Tuesday*: er, we haven't decided what to do on Tuesday yet, but there's
a good chance that we'll be in
http://hilton.org.uk/antwerp/cafe-au-lait[Café au Lait], the best
cocktail bar in Antwerp. Send us your recommendations via Twitter to
http://twitter.com/#!/PeterHilton[@PeterHilton] or
http://twitter.com/#!/NicolasLeroux[@NicolasLeroux].

*Wednesday 19:00*: Play framework meet-up, AXXES Café. Come and talk to
us about Play. Did we mention the free drinks?

*Wednesday 21:00*: French Java User Groups meet-up, AXXES Café. This
will probably be big, given the huge involvement in Java open-source and
Java User Groups in France. You probably need to be able to speak French
for this one.

*Thursday 19:00*:
http://www.devoxx.com/display/Devoxx2K10/Women+in+IT+an+unconference[Duchess
BOF], location TBA.

*Thursday 22:00*: http://www.mulkers.com/devoxx/devoxx-sound.jpg[The
Sound of Devoxx Party], Café Marmite, Trofbrug 8. This dodgy small dance
bar is great fun, especially as it gets more crowded and louder the
later you stay. Kudos to http://www.mulkers.com/[Robin Mulkers] for
picking the venue.

[[eatanddrink]]
== Recommended places to eat and drink

See http://hilton.org.uk/antwerp/[Eating & drinking in Antwerp].

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research and committer on the Play open-source
project._
