--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Back from FOSDEM: the NoSQL trend" tags: Java
conference author: Nicolas Leroux summary: "This week end, I went to
[FOSDEM](http://fosdem.org). Even if it was a bit too geeky for my
taste, it was certainly worth going. I attended quite a few talks and
met the [JBoss](http://jboss.org) team, the [play!
framework](http://playframework.org) team and [JBUG.be](http://jbug.be)
people." ---

I was actually quite surprised by the number of people attending the
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL[NoSQL] tracks. While I understand the
enthusiasm this new trend brings, it seems I am not sharing much of it
with the people I talk to.

What is NoSQL anyway? NoSQL promotes the use of very simple interfaces
such as associative arrays or Key-Value pairs. It is also possible to
largely distribute them and is highly scalable.

What really interested me about the NoSQL movement is the fact that
solutions can be schema free. How is that relevant for web applications?
I think it is a crucial point when you think about web applications, and
the social aspects that web applications bring to users nowadays. Humans
are not really structured and it is getting more and more complicated to
enforce a structure that pretends to link users, services and
technologies together.

However, to my surprise no one was interested by this aspect: it was all
about performance! Let me tell you that this is the last aspect of this
technology that I am interested by. I don't think that any of the
applications we develop require nanosecond response times and scaling to
100 million users. Besides, when you are talking about serving billions
of terabytes of content, it is a completely different infrastructure
that you are talking about anyway. So the performance aspect was quite
irrelevant to me.

So, the bottom line is: should we really care about it?

I don't see myself advising ditching relational databases just because
of performance reasons or because the latest trend tells us that NoSQL
is the future. Database performance is not yet a problem for us. What I
was interested in, being schema or data structure agnostic, is not the
main concern of the people who are developing these NoSQL solutions.
However, the tooling that SQL databases have, and the relationships
between entities are not really quite there, even if there is more and
more development in those areas.

However, because this NoSQL movement is getting more and more popular,
we might see object databases coming back as first-class citizens. Then
I might get the best of both worlds: tooling, relational queries and a
rather schema agnostic persistent storage.

In conclusion, I think this latest hype might bring new solutions that
can be used for small projects helping us to develop quicker solutions,
even if we are not quite there yet.

Nicolas
