--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Lunatech attending the 2nd Paris JUG anniversary "
tags: Java playframework fun JEE event Paris author: Nicolas Leroux
summary: "Stephane, Peter and myself will be attending the 2nd [Paris
JUG](http://parisjug.org) anniversary Tuesday the 9th of February 2010.
We will not only attend as we will be giving 2 presentations:" ---

* Stephane will be presenting
http://www.lunatech-labs.com/open-source/jax-doclets[jax-doclets], his
latest open source project.
* I will be presenting the http://playframework.org[Play! framework]
with http://guillaume.bort.fr/[Guillaume Bort], the creator of the
framework.

We have a busy evening ahead of us. We plan to talk about the
http://rivierajug.org[RivieraJUG] as well. Having excellent food and
wine with all our fellow JUG leaders and Juggers is also one of our top
priority ;) The evening looks very interesting. If you are nearby, don't
hesitate to come and talk to us, but hurry up and
http://www.jugevents.org/jugevents/event/23793[register] as the seats
are counted. We are planning to tweet about the event live to keep you
posted (and we are nice enough to translate it into English ;)).

The complete programme of the event is available
http://www.parisjug.org/xwiki/bin/view/Meeting/20100209[here]. The good
thing about the event being in Paris is that, for once, we do not need
to do the presentation in English ;) A big thanks to the Paris JUG team
for organising such an evening.

Rendez-vous Ã  Paris alors! +
Nicolas
