= Panzano Sandwich Cruncher
PeterHilton
v1.0, 2010-07-02
:title: Panzano Sandwich Cruncher
:tags: [fun]

Panzano is an Italian deli that sells the best
sandwiches in Rotterdam, and even delivers, which makes it the perfect
catering for a business lunch. However, you cannot order on-line and,
bizarrely, Panzano does not even have a web site, which makes it
difficult to order by phone or fax for a group if you neglected to
memorise all 28 sandwiches. Here is a copy of the menu (as of 1 July
2010), and an idea.

[[menu]]
== Sandwich menu

Prices are €4-6 for a white roll; €0.75 surcharge for brown, tomato,
corn or olive rolls.

[width="100%",cols="50%,50%",]
|===
a|
*Provolone.* Provolone kaas, tomaat.

*Prosciutto Cotto.* Achterham.

*Salami.* Salami zacht of pikant.

*Diavolo.* Pittige salami, zoetzure pepers.

*Di Mamma.* Provolone kaas, ui, tomaat.

*Gorgonzola.* Blauwaderige kaas, tomaat.

*Toscana.* Achterham, Provolone, tomaat.

*Parmaham.* Rauwe gedroogde ham (14 maanden).

*Pazzo.* Pittige salami, mozzarella.

*Fellini.* Salami, provolone kaas.

*Primavera.* Mozzarella, tomaat, basilicum.

*Milano.* Achterham, Provolone kaas, div. salami, tomaat.

*Tonno.* Tonijnsalade.

*Buono.* Gorgonzola, achterham, div. salami, tomaat.

a|
*Siena.* Achterham, tapenade, tomaat.

*Sorpresa.* Parmaham, mozzarella.

*Quatro.* Pikante salami, mozzarella, pesto, paprika.

*Fresco.* Mozzarella, pesto, tomaat.

*Mastroianni.* Gorgonzola, wilde spinazie.

*Bari.* Parmaham, mozzarella, pesto.

*Lino.* Provolone, rode pesto, aubergine.

*Capoccia.* Bresaola, tomaat, mozzarella.

*Mela.* Bresaola, rucola, pijnboompitten, grana padano.

*Boxie.* Wilde spinazie, aubergine, provolone.

*Ferrari.* Aubergine, artisjok, zongedroogde tomaat.

*Bambino.* Rode pesto, mozzarella, rucola.

*Vitello Tonato.* Kalfsmuis met tonijnsaus.

*Nico.* Rode pesto, bresaola, aubergine, citroen.

|===

image:../media/2010-07-02-panzano-sandwich-cruncher/panzano-bari.jpg[image]

Photo: the _Bari_, with Parma ham, green pesto and mozzarella.

To order for delivery, telephone 010 233 4999 or fax 010 233 4220 before
11:00. Delivery between 12:00 and 13:00. Cash on delivery.

Alternatively, just go and have lunch at Panzano,
http://maps.google.nl/maps?client=safari&rls=en&q=Vasteland+42,+3011+BM+Rotterdam&oe=UTF-8&redir_esc=&um=1&ie=UTF-8&hq=&hnear=Vasteland+42,+3011+Rotterdam&gl=nl&ei=IqYtTP_OA4WuON3P5eIB&sa=X&oi=geocode_result&ct=title&resnum=1&ved=0CBYQ8gEwAA[Vasteland
42, 3011 BM Rotterdam].

[[cruncher]]
== Sandwich Cruncher

The average cafe web site probably cost plenty of money, and does not
actually contain more information than is on this web page. (Hey,
Panzano, do I get a free lunch?) The average restaurant web site
probably cost even more, and is merely more flashy, pretentious and
annoying if you just want a phone number or to look at the menu. Worst
of all, these are usually static web sites that the cafe rarely updates.
I have a better idea.

What a cafe like Panzano needs is a web site where they can enter their
cafe details, menu text, prices and perhaps a few photos, and publish
the menu as a web page. And then go back to the web site and update the
menu when it changes.

Ladies who lunch, and other potential customers might be able to do all
sorts of funky things as well as just browse menus: find out where the
soup of the day is _erwtensoep_ (in winter), search for menus with more
than one vegetarian option, subscribe to an RSS feed of new
menus/dishes, browse a list of highest-rated dishes, and integrate with
Twitter and FourSquare accounts.

Lunatech would love to build this: web applications are what we are good
at.

Contact us if you are an entrepreneur who can see a business model for
how to make money from this. You might be into the printing business,
and want to do for restaurant menus what http://moo.com/[moo.com] does
for business cards, or perhaps you know how to make a subscription or
advertising model work.

Alternatively, contact us if you represent a cafe/restaurant
chain/franchise that wants this for all of their locations. For example,
there are several bagel and wok (not combined) franchises in the
Netherlands; why does http://www.dailywok.nl/[Daily Wok] have a cool,
well-designed and well-built web site with an up-to-date menu, while
http://www.woktogo.nl/[Wok to Go] has a less accessible Flash-based web
site with only a PDF menu ('our interactive menu is not yet active')?
Similarly, http://www.bagelsbeans.nl/[Bagels & Beans] only has an
awkward Flash-based version of their print menu.

Until then, a Twitter feed will do, e.g.
http://twitter.com/dailywok[@dailywok],
http://twitter.com/picknickrdam[@picknickrdam] and
http://twitter.com/sijf[@sijf].
