--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Presentations: Drools and the perfect programmer at
42" tags: presentation Drools author: Peter Hilton summary: "This
afternoon, I gave two presentations for the nice folks at
[42](http://www.42.nl/) for their Knowledge Transfer meeting, at
Rotterdam's natural history museum. Here are the slides." ---

link:perfect-programmer.pdf[image:perfect-programmer.png[In search of
the perfect programmer]]
link:decision-service.pdf[image:decision-service.png[How to build a
decision service using JBoss Rules (a.k.a. Drools)]]

link:perfect-programmer.pdf[In search of the perfect programmer] (PDF,
4.2 MB) is a short presentation, to get things started. This is a
light-hearted look at the diversity of programmer backgrounds, and a
serious point about what that means for programmers, and the people who
hire or manage them. At least the jokes got a few laughs.

link:decision-service.pdf[How to build a decision service using JBoss
Rules (a.k.a. Drools)] (PDF, 639 KB) is a technical introduction to
Drools Expert, the rules engine in JBoss Rules, based on the example of
a simple decision service, and focusing on what the code looks like. The
decision service source code is available from the earlier article
link:/2010/01/04/how-build-decision-service-using-jboss-rules-execution-server[How
to build a decision service using JBoss Rules Execution Server], the
last of three articles that explain the decision service example in more
detail.

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
