--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "ParisJUG we love you!" tags: jax-doclets JUG
playframework Paris open-source author: Nicolas Leroux summary:
"Stephane, Peter and I went to Paris for 2 days. Our agenda was quite
full and we really had a great time." ---

The http://parisjug.org[Paris JUG] starred
http://sacha.labourey.com/[Sacha Labourey] in a great presentation about
French open source software, which explained the traps to avoid when
making a living from open-source software. He actually came with a
surprise guest, http://www.thedelphicfuture.org/[Marc Fleury], who
joined him for the Q&A.

Sacha's presentation was followed by six short talks about French open
source software. St√©phane presented
http://www.lunatech-labs.com/open-source/jax-doclets[jax-doclets]. He
captivated the audience by showing them how easy it was to document REST
APIs and XML bindings. People were already asking him for feature
enhancements so I guess he will be quite busy during the next new weeks
.

Guillaume Bort from http://zenexity.fr[Zenexity] and
http://www.lunatech-research.com/team/nicolas-leroux[myself], presented
the http://playframework.org[Play! framework]. I was pleasantly
surprised by the audience's positive reaction: it seems that there is a
huge need in the Java world for such a framework/tool.

The event was really well organized by the Paris JUG team and the
evening was wonderful. I also got more of a chance to explain the vision
behind the Play! framework during the drinking event. More about that in
a forthcoming post.

So, what else did we do during those two days? Guillaume and I had the
chance to do an interview for http://lescastcodeurs.com/[les cast
codeurs], I had a long talk with Habib Guergachi and Guillaume Bort from
Zenexity about their visions and how Lunatech and Zenexity could work
together, and finally we did a presentation for http://octo.com[Octo's]
developers.

So it was quite busy and I have to say that I am now quite exhausted,
but full of ideas. Thanks again to the Paris JUG team and especially to
http://www.antoniogoncalves.org/xwiki/bin/view/Main/WebHome[Antonio].

In conclusion, two days well spent in Paris, a few hours of sleep, a
great night and two rich days full of encounter.
