--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "How to get a job interview at Lunatech" tags:
employment author: Peter Hilton summary: "Our previous article on [how
to get a job at Lunatech](/2010/08/05/how-get-job-lunatech) explained
why going through a recruiter makes it less likely that you will get an
interview. Having explained how not to get an interview, this article
explains what definitely will get you one." ---

[[sixways]]
== Six ways to get an interview at Lunatech without writing a CV

We want to make it as easy as possible for a good candidate to get our
attention, and get invited to a job interview here at Lunatech.
Fortunately for good candidates, there are short-cuts: in general,
having any _one_ of the following will get you invited for an interview,
if we think you are looking for a programming job.

. A recommendation from someone we know and respect.
. Committer status on an open-source project that we think is cool.
. A good programming blog.
. An impressive Stack Overflow profile.
. A portfolio of interesting finished software.
. We met you at some kind of event and thought you were a cool
programmer.

The rationale here is that a job interview aims to establish whether you
meet all of the criteria for being hired. If we can tell in advance that
you meet one of more of these criteria then you are already more
interesting than the average candidate, and we will want to interview
you to check the other stuff.

The old-school approach still works, of course: an impressive
professional CV is also going to get you an interview.

[[recommendation]]
== Personal recommendation

It should not be a surprise that a personal recommendation is at the top
of the list (yes, it is an ordered list). Not only does a recommendation
come with a way of judging the quality of the information (how much we
trust the refereeâ€™s opinion), it often comes with far more interesting
detail than the bare facts that a CV presents, as well as the
opportunity to ask questions about other things we care about.

It should be obvious that nothing a recruiter says counts as a personal
recommendation, because we cannot help but suppose that like estate
agents, they will say anything to get their commission.

[[opensource]]
== Open-source project

You do not have to actually _be_
http://blog.emmanuelbernard.com/about/[Emmanuel Bernard] to get an
interview based on your open-source project - there are a lot of
open-source projects that we know about. Involvement as a committer
gives us a large amount of prior information about where your skills and
interests lie. Most importantly, because we can see the code, the
project actually _shows_ us your work instead of just telling us about
it, which is what a CV does.

Note that there is a big difference between having submitted a patch or
two and being a long-standing committer. A single patch tells us a lot
less about your code, or your ability to get things done. If you are a
committer, it is either your own project, or you persuaded the existing
team to let you join them, both of which are interesting.

[[blog]]
== Programming blog

You do not have to actually _be_
http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2004/02/about-me.html[Jeff Attwood] for
your blog to get you an interview - there are a lot of good programming
blogs out there, most of which feature more code than
http://www.codinghorror.com/[Coding Horror]. There is more than one way
for a programming blog to be 'good', in fact. Some are only about the
code they publish, some are about the quality of the writing and the
ability to explain difficult subjects clearly, and some demonstrate
insight into broader software development issues.

Usually, a candidate's blog works more like an extremely detailed CV
that includes a lot of context and background information, and therefore
things to ask about in an interview.

[[stackoverflow]]
== Stack Overflow profile

You do not have to actually _be_
http://msmvps.com/blogs/jon_skeet/archive/2009/01/15/stack-overflow-reputation-and-being-a-micro-celebrity.aspx[Jon
Skeet] to have a http://stackoverflow.com/[Stack Overflow] profile that
tells us more than the average CV. Like a programming blog, Stack
Overflow activity usually provides a far more useful picture of
someone's interests and written communication skills than a CV does. Any
on-line community would show us someone's writing, but Stack Overflow's
tags uniquely demonstrate which programming topics someone writes about.

[[portfolio]]
== Software project portfolio

As with work on an open-source project, a good portfolio could show us
your work in a way that would get us interested. This would have to be a
portfolio of interesting finished software, preferably running on-line
where we can see it. This is not actually very common, and not
necessarily useful enough. Although it gives us an opportunity to see
your work and to get an idea of you having finished stuff, it might not
be possible to separate your work from someone else's. Also, if the
source code is not published we would only be looking at your work in a
limited sense.

[[meeting]]
== A previous meeting

Interest in a job vacancy from someone we have met is interesting
because of how hard it can be to find people who fit perfectly into an
existing team. We are not all clones of each other at Lunatech, which is
why this is not at the top of the list, but knowing that we have enough
in common with a candidate to want to work with each other is an
important part of the selection process.

This actually happens quite often, because we both attend and host a lot
of events each year, as well as our famous office parties.

== CV

It could possibly be a surprise that the CV itself is last. This is
mostly because it can be difficult and time-consuming to interpret a CV,
especially when the interesting facts are well-hidden. One of the other
items on our list can get you an interview invitation more quickly; we
are looking for URLs at the top of the CV. An impressive professional CV
is one that shows commercial software development experience that
matches http://www.lunatech-research.com/content/employment[what we are
looking for].

== Conclusion

Sending us a traditional CV is not a bad idea, but it does not make it
particularly easy for us to conclude that we want to interview you. At
the very least, we will always try to find out more on-line because a CV
always leaves too much out. Ultimately, we are looking for at least one
good reason to interview you, which is where the list above comes from.

In fact, if you really could put one of the bullets above on your CV,
then you can probably just skip the CV and tell us where to find details
on-line. Either way, send your e-mail to employment@lunatech.com.

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
