--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Plan Cruncher - Play! in production" tags:
playframework web-applications author: Peter Hilton summary: "At
Lunatech, we recently decided to build a small web application to
implement one of our ideas for generating business plan summaries. We
needed to get this running on-line as quickly as possible, with minimal
time spent coding, so we chose to build it using the Play! framework.
The result was fast development, clean code, easy deployment and an
instantly popular web application -
[http://plancruncher.com/](http://plancruncher.com/)." ---

[[born]]
== Plan Cruncher is born

On 11 February, I presented an idea for ‘Business plan symbology’ at the
http://www.meetup.com/Bootstrapping-and-agility/calendar/12317827/[Lean
Start-up] event organised by http://www.lunatech-ventures.com/[Lunatech
Ventures]. Basically, the idea is that if you choose a few standard
icons that apply to your start-up idea, then you can put together a
standard one-page summary of your business plan, with standard text,
that avoids the length of normal business plans.

We had a great discussion about the idea, and got lots of positive
feedback, including
http://www.involvd.com/blog/2010/02/17/the-route-to-launch-day/[Invold.com]
and
http://turtlethink.com/2010/02/business-plans-2-0-lean-and-icon-based/[turtlethink.com]
blog posts, so we decided to do the lean and agile thing, and get the
idea on-line. This meant that we needed to code a simple web application
that would allow people to select some icons, and generate and e-mail a
PDF of the business plan summary.

[[play]]
== Play! framework

This is the kind of thing that PHP is ideal for - hacking-together a
quick web application. PHP is not our thing though, because of the mess
you inevitably end up with, which is one of the reasons why we prefer to
use Java. However, while we normally work with the Java Enterprise
Edition platform, that would be far too big a sledgehammer for this kind
of small web application. We just want all of those Java libraries to be
available in case we need them.

The new Java web application framework in the ‘best of both worlds’
category is the http://www.playframework.org/[Play! framework], which
massively simplifies much of the unnecessary complexity that has
accumulated among Java EE development conventions. Like PHP, Play! is by
and for web developers, bringing a different set of values to the kind
of framework favoured by the heavy-weight Java EE community.

In particular, Play! was ideal for this project, because of the
development speed you get from its edit-save-reload page development
cycle (no build or deployment steps required), the cleanness and brevity
of the code you end up writing (no code-generation), and the ease of
integrating things like the Play! PDF module. We also wanted it to be
easy to push new changes to the live application on a daily basis
without interrupting users, because we were going to release-early, with
a new idea that we were still thinking about.

== plancruncher.com

Everything worked out beautifully: despite me being on holiday for a
week, and Nicolas having other work to do, we had Plan Cruncher in
production at http://plancruncher.com/ within a couple of weeks, after
spending about two days each on design, coding and testing. It was fun
as well.

image:plancruncher.png[plancruncher.com]

After the first release, we released a new version every day for a week
or so, to incorporate initial user feedback, as
http://search.twitter.com/search?q=plancruncher[#plancruncher] started
to find its way around Twitter. Doing this with a stateful web
application is a problem, especially if the application server takes a
long time to redeploy the application.

We had no such problem with Play! because we set-up two instances of the
application, and configured Apache load balancing to switch to the
second instance if the first is not available. Since a Play! web
application is stateless, you can use this to release a new version,
without users noticing the switch from one instance to the next. What’s
more, we can deploy a new version of Plan Cruncher (on both instances)
in about ten seconds, because Play! application start-up is so fast.
link:/2010/03/22/upgrading-your-play-applications-without-downtime[Upgrading
your Play! applications without downtime] explains how this works.

[[next]]
== What’s next

Who knows where Plan Cruncher will go from here, but some further
development is inevitable. Big projects often start out with a small
application like this, which is another reason why we are glad we did
not start with PHP.

We are certainly considering localisation, after attention from blogs in
http://venturebeat.com/2010/03/11/visualize-your-business-plan-with-plancruncher/[the
US], http://web.rambler.ru/post/biznes-plan/[Russia],
http://www.web2null.de/plancruncher[Germany],
http://www.workingcapital.telecomitalia.it/2010/03/plan-cruncher-un-tool-online-per-riassumere-in-icone-il-vostro-business-plan/[Italy],
http://www.2v.lv/index.php/dienas-internets/2719-atrasts-internet-biznesa-plnu-vizualizators-jaunajiem-uzmjiem-plancrunchercom[Latvia]
and http://www.100shiki.com/archives/2010/03/plan_cruncher.html[Japan].

We also have (a long list of) other ideas for lightweight web
applications like Plan Cruncher, and it is good to know that we have a
platform that offers us rapid development and results in a small amount
of clean code. Of course, these are advantages that large applications
can also benefit from.

_http://hilton.org.uk/about_ph.phtml[Peter Hilton] is a senior software
developer at Lunatech Research._
