--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Processing EDIFACT messages with Smooks" tags:
author: Ludovico Fischer summary: "[Smooks](http://www.smooks.org) is a
set of tools written in the Java programming language to assist you in
parsing a variety of formats such as XML, CSV, fixed width formats and
making the information accessible from your Java code. My interest in
Smooks was related to the fact that it is one of the few open source
projects which offer facilities for accessing data in EDI formats. In
fact, Smooks might be the only actively-maintained open source project
that offers this." ---

In this article, I am going to share the results of my investigation on
using Smooks to process EDI data, and in particular messages that follow
the UN/EDIFACT standards.

[[ProcessingEDIFACTmessageswithSmooks-WhatisUN%2FEDIFACTanyway%3F]]
== What is UN/EDIFACT anyway?

EDI generally refers to a set of standards for exchanging electronic
messages. The two main standards are the North American ANSI X12 and
UN/EDIFACT, which is being maintained by the United Nations. UN/EDIFACT
messages generally contain the information necessary to perform such
business tasks as delivering a shipment or placing an order, and are
heavily used in the logistics industry, which is one of Lunatech’s
fields of expertise. In fact, Lunatech has developed over the years its
own set of tools for EDIFACT processing, and we were interested in
comparing our home-grown solutions with what others have done.

[[ProcessingEDIFACTmessageswithSmooks-TheSmooksprocessingmodel]]
== The Smooks processing model

Usually, Smooks maps its input onto an XML stream, which can then be
processed with the approaches familiar from the XML world. In addition
to that, because Smooks limits the portion of the document that is kep
in memory at any one time, Smooks can offer increased performance
compared to, for example, a traditional XSLT processor.

In the case of an UN/EDIFACT document, Smooks offers two solutions. Both
require specifying a mapping from the EDI message segments to SAX events
using a custom XML format (see the official Smooks documentation for
http://www.smooks.org/mediawiki/index.php?title=V1.5:edi-to-java[an
example of the syntax]). Then you can either process the SAX events in
your customary way, or use the ECJ, the EDI Java compiler supplied by
Smooks, to generate Java classes that allow you to access the content of
the EDI messages as fields. Smooks also provides a complete set of
generated Java classes for the whole of the UN/EDIFACT specification.

[[ProcessingEDIFACTmessageswithSmooks-Evaluationprocess]]
== Evaluation process

My evaluation involved attempting to perform some of the common EDIFACT
processing tasks using Smooks. I wanted to read EDIFACT messages, but
also to write them and modify their content. In certain cases, I wanted
to introduce some additional validation rules beyond what is defined in
the standard. I used both hand written mapping files and the generated
classes supplied by Smooks.

In general, Smooks works as advertised. I was able to access EDIFACT
documents as an XML stream, and also use the generated Java classes to
manipulate the information. Nevertheless, there were a couple of
limitations.

One problem was that the investment in designing the mapping EDIFACT to
XML mapping was not sufficiently repaid. Most of all because Smooks only
offers a solution for processing EDI input, and you are essentially left
on your own if you need to output EDI documents. For instance, I could
not find a way to reuse the mapping file to perform validation of the
output.

On the other hand, using the generated Java classes, I could produce
valid EDIFACT output, but I could not specify any extra validation
rules. In addition, these classes are a bit unwieldly to use, as
generated code is wont to be, and you are forced to use a different
class for every EDIFACT message type, even though the syntax and the
structure of the different messages are very similar.

[[ProcessingEDIFACTmessageswithSmooks-Conclusion]]
== Conclusion

I feel that Smooks EDIFACT processing is a bit too rigid for our
customer’s needs and we will probably stick to our own solution for the
time being.

The goal of EDI processing is probably best achieved at a different
abstraction level than Smooks’. In Smooks, every configuration you
define or every class you generate targets a single message type. We are
looking to have a set of tools that work on the common features of the
different EDI message formats, and can be combined to flexibly handle
both input and output.

Nevertheless, Smooks is the only game in town at the moment if you are
looking for open source, and it might be good enough if your worklow is
limited to ingesting large quantities of EDI messages, without much
further processing.

_link:/author/ludovico-fischer[Ludovico Fischer] is a software developer
at Lunatech Research._
