= Last article from m
FroMage
v1.0, 2011-10-14
:title: Last article from m
:tags: [fun]


"Today is my last day as a Lunatech Research employee,
so this is my last blog entry on this site.

[[Lastarticlefromme-Lookingback]]
== Looking back

Lunatech and I have a long history. Ancient in IT timescales in fact,
because I started working for Lunatech in Rotterdam in 1998 for a summer
internship back when we were not even ten people yet, had a small office
which looked like a typical startup. That internship changed into a
permanent contract shortly afterwards, and I've started working on Java
(mostly) and Perl (sometimes) since that day.

What made Lunatech such a nice place was that the people working there
were smarter than average, and while smarter people all have their own
type of autism, we only had friendly people with whom teamwork was not
only possible but agreeable, motivating and highly rewarding. And to
this day it's still true, now that we're a lot more employees in a much
bigger office that doesn't look like a startup that much anymore (though
it definitely doesn't look like a boring work place).

Over the years I've learned a lot at Lunatech, as a person and as a
developer, I've had the opportunity to attend conferences such as
http://devoxx.com/[Devoxx], start the http://rivierajug.org[Riviera JUG]
and organise my own conferences, produce and work on
http://www.lunatech-labs.com[open-source software] and even on customer
projects, use only cool and/or new technologies to make the best
products in the most rewarding way possible.

With Nicolas Leroux, we've promoted
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_craftsmanship[software
craftmanship] back before it became a _thing_ (“Artisan Développeur” in
French), but a good company to work for is more than just that. Lunatech
has always been very accommodating with its employees. As long as the
job is done well (and it is always), work hours are flexible, location,
hardware and software too. In fact the only thing not flexible is
quality, but otherwise you're pretty much free to do a good work in the
way you can justify is best. Process, policies or dogma doesn't get in
the way of delivery.

Lunatech has always let its employees pursue education as well if they
wanted to. I myself did two years of university in France, working
remotely part-time for Lunatech. Throughout the years I can tell you
Lunatech, and especially our beloved benevolent evil orverlord Michael
Pentowski will make sure that Lunatech will help you when you need help,
because employees not numbers, and it's this looking out for us that
makes this place feel like family.

Back in 2004 I left Lunatech for the first time, not because I was
unhappy in the company, but because I moved definitively from Rotterdam
to the south of France, and decided I wanted to become a University
professor. After an interesting PhD, I was determined *not* to become a
professor. I was also about fed up with commuting, especially since I
wanted to spend more time with the kids, so I decided I should try
working from home.

Because I obviously stayed friend Lunatech ex-colleagues, the subject
came up during a discussion and we decided to give it a try once again.
So in 2008 I joined up again, seeing familiar and new faces, but I dare
say that after 4 years of absence Lunatech got an even more interesting
place to work in. I really had a blast these last 4 years.

[[Lastarticlefromme-Lookingforward]]
== Looking forward

Then early this year when the news started spreading about the
http://relation.to/Tutorials/IntroductionToCeylon[Ceylon language], I
became very enthusiastic about the ideas in that language and because I
wanted very much a compiler to test this language, and none was
forthcoming, I naturally got in contact with the Ceylon team and started
quickly hacking the compiler. It's been crazy work, working almost every
night and weekend on it since May. I've rarely been so motivated to work
on something in my free time for something that isn't for my immediate
needs (I did spend half a year of evenings on a Picasa clone that I made
to host my own photos), but this language, this compiler and the team of
people helping build this are just that motivating.

I guess it's only natural that after spending 3 years of PhD working on
the implementation of a language, compiler and virtual machines that I'd
be interested to go at it again, but this time with reasonable hope that
we'll have users :)

So after months of hard evening work, when the occasion presented itself
to join the Ceylon Red Hat team as a full-time employee, I decided I had
to go on this adventure, I couldn't stay in the Shire among my dear
Hobbit friends, I simply had to take the hard and long road, get rid of
the Goblins and Smog on the way and do all I can to make Ceylon a great
language with great tools. It's always hard to leave the comfort of home
and family, such as Lunatech, but sometimes an Adventure is all you
need, it imposes itself to you. I'm very glad to be joining Red Hat and
I'm not that scared of the unknown so much because I know a lot of my
new colleagues already and they're all smart and friendly, and the
Ceylon team certainly kick ass.

[[Lastarticlefromme-Togettothepoint]]
== To get to the point

All this to say, I cannot recommend a better place to work for than
Lunatech. If you're in the Netherlands and are a talented developer,
then http://www.lunatech-research.com/content/employment[you want to
work there]. If you're studying and want the best place to work for,
http://www.lunatech-research.com/content/internships[you need to apply
for an internship there].

It's a weird feeling to be both sad to leave and exited to start a new
job. This is my last blog entry here, but there are many more to come
from me at Red Hat, including my upcoming Ceylon presentations at
http://rivieradev.fr/application/talk?id=138[Riviera DEV] and
http://www.devoxx.com/display/DV11/The+Ceylon+programming+language[Devoxx].
