--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Fronteers at Lunatech. WTF?" tags: front-end event
author: Peter Hilton summary: "On 15 September, Lunatech hosted a
[Fronteers](http://fronteers.nl/) event for the first time. *Fronteers*
is an industry association for front-end developers in the Netherlands
and Belgium, which makes this event pretty strange considering that
pretty much everyone at Lunatech writes Java code, while probably none
of the 400 Fronteers members do. " ---

The evening included beer, networking and two presentations. Egor Kloos
a.k.a. http://dutchcelt.nl/[dutchcelt], senior front-end developer and
user-experience expert at Lunatech, explained issues in enterprise
front-end development. http://whoisjw.tv/[Jeroen Wijering], developer of
the widely-used http://www.longtailvideo.com/players/[JW Player] video
player, presented HTML5 video.

image:fronteers.png[Fronteers logo]

[[development]]
== Front-end development

What is front-end development?
http://www.guardian.co.uk/help/insideguardian/2009/sep/28/blogpost[Inside
the Guardian blog] helpfully explains:

____
In our visually and tecnhologically sophisticated society, access to
information and knowledge seems easier than making sense of it or decide
its veracity - on the web, pages and appplications are built by
front-end developers to present and put data or relationships in
context.

Front-end or client-side development is a relatively obscure Internet
discipline. Historically, this role has been known under several
aliases, htmler, web designer, coder, frontender and so on, but its core
functions remain the same while expanding with the progress of the
Internet. It is a hinge role that requires both aesthetic sensitivity
and programmatic rigor.
____

[[convergence]]
== Enterprise application development convergence

In the past, this aspect of the World-Wide Web has remained separate
from the enterprise software development projects taking place inside
the firewall - Lunatechâ€™s core business. Today, the gradual shift of the
last ten years has resulted in a new convergence: businesses now use
consumer-style web-based software such as Google Apps that runs outside
the firewall, and IT managers are increasingly demanding business
applications with a user-experience as rich as provided by the social
networking software their children use at home.

In practical terms, this means that the discipline of front-end
development, with its more sophisticated visual and user-interaction
design, has arrived in the enterprise software development world. This
collaboration means better bespoke business software: application
developers are not limited to ugly user-interfaces with poor usability,
and front-end developers no longer just build product marketing web
sites.

Now things get interesting.
