--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Play Framework 1.2: Writing a Multitenancy
Application with Hibernate Filters" tags: playframework author: Erik
Bakker summary: "This article describes a method to simplify the
construction of a Play 1.2 application with multiple users that have
little or no shared data, using Hibernate Filters." ---

A multitenancy application is characterized by having multiple users
that have independent data in the system. An example could be a todo
list application, where every user has his own todo lists and tasks, and
there is no relation to lists or tasks of other users of the system.

[[Conventionalsolution]]
== Conventional solution

Various methods can be used to separate the data of the users. You can
use different database servers or different database instances within
the same database server. For maintenance reasons however it is often
preferable to keep all the data together and use a single database. In
this case, every record in the database, and every database mapped Java
class, must have a property that keeps track of the user to which it
belongs, like in the following example:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
public class Task extends Model {
    public String description;
    public Boolean done;

    @ManyToOne
    public User user;
}
----

On the other side of the relationship, we have the User class:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
@Entity
public class User extends Model {
    public String name;
    
    @OneToMany(mappedBy="user")
    public Set<Task> tasks;
}
----

Now, to get a list of all the Tasks for the user that is logged in, we
must do something like:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
List<Task> tasks = Task.find("byUser", loggedInUser).fetch();
----

And to search for Tasks for the user that is logged in and that are not
done yet, we can do:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
List<Task> tasks = Task.find("byUserAndDone", loggedInUser, false).fetch();
----

What we see is that in every query we have to explicitly specify the
user, which can become very cumbersome. This is especially true when you
have a large amount of models that are all tied to a single user.

[[HibernateFilters]]
== Hibernate Filters

You can improve on the situation by using Hibernate Filters. This
feature of Hibernate allows you to automatically add extra `WHERE`
clauses to every query that queries a specific table. It is slightly
similar to creating a view on a table, but it is easier to manage from
your application, easier to apply to multiple tables and it scales
better, as you don't have to explicitly define views for every user.

Hibernate filters consist of two annotations. The first is an
`@FilterDef` annotation that defines the filter. The second is an
`@Filter` annotation that applies the filter to the class the annotation
is set on. A filter only has to be defined once, and can be applied to
many entities.

We want to use the filter in the entire package, so we specify them on a
package level in in the file `package-info.java`, residing in the
`models` package:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
@FilterDef(name="user", parameters= { @ParamDef( name="user_id", type="long") }, defaultCondition=":user_id = user_id", )
package models;

import org.hibernate.annotations.FilterDef;
import org.hibernate.annotations.ParamDef;
----

Here we have defined a filter with the name `user`, and one parameter
`user_id` of type `long`. We have also specified a default condition.
This condition can be overridden each time the filter is applied, but
this is a good default for the cases where you just have a `user` member
in an entity class, like in our `Task`.

It should also be possible to just define this filter on an arbitrary
entity class, but a
http://opensource.atlassian.com/projects/hibernate/browse/HHH-2091[bug]
in Hibernate may cause you trouble in that case.

[[ApplyingaFilter]]
== Applying a Filter

Now that the filter is defined, we can apply it on an entity class, for
example on our `Task`:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
@Entity
@Filter(name="user")
public class Task extends Model {
  â‹®
}
----

Finally, we must enable this particular filter. It is convenient to have
it automatically applied on every request, so we can do that in an
`@Before` interceptor:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
@Before
public static void setFilters() {

    Long loggedInUser = 1L; // Replace this with the actual user id
        
    ((Session)JPA.em().getDelegate()).enableFilter("user").setParameter("user_id", loggedInUser);
}
----

Here we grab the instance of the Hibernate `Session`, enable the filter
`user` that we defined, and set the parameter `user_id`. If you use
Play's `secure` module, you could get this user id from the session.

This interceptor can be defined on a superclass of your controllers, or
on a class that you add to your controllers with an `@With` annotation.

[[Result]]
== Result

Now with the `user` filter applied, we can do a query like
`Task.findAll()` and we only get the tasks of the user that is logged
in. Also queries like `Tasks.count()` or `Tasks.find("byDone", false)`
and even HQL queries only take tasks of the currently logged in user
into account.

Every Play requests has a fresh Hibernate Session, so if you do not
enable a filter during the request, you can just query your entire
database. This can be useful for some global administration page. If you
want to do a query without the filter after enabling it, you can disable
it with `((Session)JPA.em().getDelegate()).disableFilter("user")`.

[[Additionaluses]]
== Additional uses

Filters can also be very useful for implementing a soft-delete. Add a
filter that filters away records that are flagged as deleted, and you
don't have do modify any queries in your program. In general, a filter
is useful everywhere you have multiple queries with a common selection
criterium and you want to unclutter your queries.

[[PlayGotcha]]
== Play Gotcha

Play 1.1.1 has a
http://play.lighthouseapp.com/projects/57987/tickets/478-exception-thrown-when-redeploying-package-infojava-files#ticket-478-5[bug]
that bites you when you have a package-info.java file in a package that
has a class with an enum or nested class. You get a "Compilation Error -
The file /app/models/package-info.java could not be compiled. Error
raised is : The type package-info is already defined" message. A
https://github.com/playframework/play/pull/54[patch] is available and
will hopefully make it into Play 1.2.

Meanwhile, you can apply the patch to your Play installation, or
alternatively define the `@FilterDef` on the first-loaded model in your
application.

[[Conclusion]]
== Conclusion

For maintenance reasons, it might be preferable to keep all data of a
multitenant application in a single database. To avoid unnecessary
repetition of a query criterium that selects only data for the current
user, you can use Hibernate filters. With the Play framework, it is very
easy to enable such a filter in an interceptor.

_link:/author/eamelink[Erik Bakker] is a software developer at Lunatech
Research._
