= Play framework 1.2 file upload with play.db.jpa.Blob
PeterHilton
v1.0, 2011-04-26
:title: Play framework 1.2 file upload with play.db.jpa.Blob
:tags: [playframework,json,java]

This article describes how to use the http://www.playframework.org/[Play framework]’s built-in features for
handling HTTP file uploads and saving the data in files on the server’s
file system, in Play 1.2. This is frequently-used in web applications
for things like allowing users to upload photos of themselves.

Source code for this article is available at
https://github.com/hilton/play-blob.

[[architecture]]
== Architectural considerations

There are generally two approaches to persisting binary data: either
save the data as a file on the server’s file system, or store the data
directly in a database table. There are pros and cons to each approach.
Using the file system may be easier to implement, but might not scale.
Using the database allows you to support transactions, but might not
scale.

Confusingly, `play.db.jpa.Blob` data is stored in a file outside the
database, and does not use the `java.sql.Blob` type with a
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_large_object[BLOB] in the database.
On the server, Play stores the uploaded image in a file in the
`attachments/` folder, inside the application folder. The file name (a
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uuid[UUID]) and MIME type are stored in a
database attribute whose SQL type is `VARCHAR`.

To store the data in a database column, you would annotate a model
property with `@javax.persistence.Lob` which results in the data being
stored in a column whose SQL type is BLOB or CLOB. How to implement this
approach and how it compares to using the file system are beyond the
scope of this article.

[[upload]]
== Upload a file and store it on the server

The basic use case of uploading, storing and serving a file is extremely
easy in Play. This is because the binding framework automatically binds
a file uploaded from an HTML form to your JPA model, and because Play
provides convenience methods that make serving binary data as easy as
serving plain text.

To store file uploads in your model, add a property of type
`play.db.jpa.Blob`

\{% highlight java %} package models; import play.db.jpa.Blob; import
play.db.jpa.Model; import javax.persistence.Entity; @Entity public class
User extends Model \{ public String name; public Blob photo; } \{%
endhighlight %}

To upload files, add a form to your view template:

\{% highlight groovy %} #\{form @addUser(),
enctype:'multipart/form-data'} #\{/form} \{% endhighlight %}

Then, in the controller, add an action that saves the upload in a new
model object:

\{% highlight java %} public static void addUser(User user) \{
user.save(); index(); } \{% endhighlight %}

This code does not appear to do anything other than save the JPA entity,
because the file upload is handled automatically by Play. First, before
the start of the action method, the uploaded file is saved in a
sub-folder of `tmp/uploads/`. Next, when the entity is saved, the file
is copied to the `attachments/` folder, with a UUID as the file name.
Finally, when the action is complete, the temporary file is deleted.

To save attachments in a different folder, specify a different path in
the `application.conf` file. This can be an absolute path, or a relative
path to a folder inside the Play application folder:

\{% highlight java %} attachments.path=photos \{% endhighlight %}

To display the uploaded images, add image tags to a view:

\{% highlight groovy %} #\{list items:models.User.findAll(), as:'user'}
image:@%7BuserPhoto(user.id)%7D[image] #\{/list} \{% endhighlight %}

Finally, add a controller method to load the model object and render the
image:

\{% highlight java %} public static void userPhoto(long id) \{ final
User user = User.findById(id); notFoundIfNull(user);
response.setContentTypeIfNotSet(user.photo.type());
renderBinary(user.photo.get()); } \{% endhighlight %}

[[update]]
== Update the upload

If you provide a `user.id` form (request) parameter, you can update an
entry the same way you save one:

\{% highlight java %} public static void updateUser(User user) \{
user.save(); index(); } \{% endhighlight %}

If a file upload is included, this will be saved as a new file, whose
name is a new UUID. This means that the original file will now be
orphaned. If you do not have unlimited disk space then you will have to
implement your own scheme for cleaning up. There are several possible
approaches.

The brute force approach is to implement an
http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.2/jobs[asynchronous job]
that periodically queries the JPA model for all currently-used file
references, scans the `attachments/` folder, and deletes unused files.
This might scale badly.

Depending on your application, it might make sense to maintain
references to all previous versions of attachments in your model, so
that you can display them in the user interface, as a wiki generally
does for previous versions of each page. Then the clean-up could either
be manual, triggered when uploading a new file or from an asynchronous
job. The clean up policy might be to keep a certain number of versions,
or delete previous versions beyond a certain age. The `@PreUpdate` and
`@PreRemove` JPA interceptors are useful for doing this kind of thing.

A more hard-core solution would be to modify `play.db.jpa.Blob` to
create an alternative `BinaryField` field implementation that handles
transaction-aware file upload updates.

[[delete]]
== Delete the upload

If you delete an object with a `play.db.jpa.Blob` property, the file in
the `attachments/` folder is not deleted automatically. You can delete
the file manually via a reference to a `java.io.File` property, as in
the following action method.

\{% highlight java %} public static void deleteUser(long id) \{ final
User user = User.findById(id); user.photo.getFile().delete();
user.delete(); index(); } \{% endhighlight %}

Alternatively, you could encapsulate the file deletion in the model, by
overriding the delete method in `User.java` to delete the file after the
database entity has been successfully deleted.

\{% highlight java %} @Override public void _delete() \{
super._delete(); photo.getFile().delete(); } \{% endhighlight %}

[[filename]]
== Upload a file and save the file name

Sometimes you want to store the name of the originally uploaded file, so
that you can map the file extension to a MIME type on the server, or so
that you can serve the file as an attachment with the original file
name.

To get at the file name, you need to bind the form control to a
`java.io.File` action method parameter. This means that you need a new
action method in your controller that constructs the model object from
separate form parameters, instead of binding the whole model object as
in the first example.

Add the new action method to the controller, to instantiate a new model
instance and its `Blog` property:

\{% highlight java %} public static void addUserWithFileName(File photo)
throws FileNotFoundException \{ final User user = new User();
user.photoFileName = photo.getName(); user.photo = new Blob();
user.photo.set(new FileInputStream(photo),
MimeTypes.getContentType(photo.getName())); user.save(); index(); } \{%
endhighlight %}

To make this work, first add the new `photoFileName` property to the
model:

\{% highlight java %} @Entity public class User extends Model \{ public
String photoFileName; public Blob photo; } \{% endhighlight %}

Next, in the template, display the saved file name with the image, and
change the form to use the new controller, and so that its file upload
control’s name is just `photo` instead of `user.photo`:

\{% highlight groovy %} #\{list items:models.User.findAll(), as:'user'}
image:@%7BuserPhoto(user.id)%7D[image,title="${user.photoFileName}"]
#\{/list} #\{form @addUserWithFileName(), enctype:'multipart/form-data'}
#\{/form} \{% endhighlight %}

[[download]]
=== Download the file as an attachment

When you serve a binary file to a web browser, the browser will normally
display the data in the browser window, if possible. For example, the
images in the example above are shown in-line in the browser window if
you access their URLs directly.

However, you can set an HTTP header to instruct the web browser to treat
the file as an ‘attachment’, which generally results in the web browser
downloading the file to the user’s computer.

First, add a new action for the download. Assuming that the file name is
always set, the only difference to the `userPhoto` action is that we
pass the file name as a parameter to the `renderBinary` method, which
causes Play to set the `Content-Disposition` response header, providing
a file name.

\{% highlight java %} public static void downloadUserPhoto(long id) \{
final User user = User.findById(id); notFoundIfNull(user);
response.setContentTypeIfNotSet(user.photo.type());
renderBinary(user.photo.get(), user.photoFileName); } \{% endhighlight
%}

Now update the list of photos in the view template to include a link to
the download URL.

\{% highlight groovy %} #\{list items:models.User.findAll(), as:'user'}
link:@%7BdownloadUserPhoto(user.id)%7D[image:@%7BApplication.userPhoto(user.id)%7D[image]]
#\{/list} \{% endhighlight %}

[[contenttype]]
=== Support custom content types

The response’s content type is set in the controller’s `userPhoto`
action method, using the type stored in the Blob.

The `play.libs.MimeTypes` looks up the MIME type for the given file
name’s extension, using the list in
`$PLAY_HOME/framework/src/play/libs/mime-types.properties`

Since Play 1.2 you can add your own types to the `conf/application.conf`
file. For example, to add a MIME type for GIMP images with the `.xcf`
extension, add the line:

\{% highlight java %} mimetype.xcf=application/x-gimp-image \{%
endhighlight %}

Note that with the code examples above, this only works if you use the
`addUserWithFileName` action above, which explicitly looks up the MIME
type based on the original file name. The earlier `addUser` example uses
the MIME type sent in the file upload HTTP request. My web browser
(Safari 5.0.4) sets the request content type to _image/png_ for PNG
images, but does not recognise an `.xcf` file and sets its content type
to _application/octet-stream_.

=== Conclusion

The Play framework greatly simplifies the task of handling and storing
file uploads in a web application. However, this is for storing files in
the server’s file system, which might not be the ideal solution for your
application. To store the binary data in a database table, you would
need to work out how to use JPA’s `@Lob` annotation.

_Thanks to http://learn-to-play.tumblr.com/[Niko Schmuck] for additional
review comments on this article._

