= Review - Play Framework Cookbook
hilton
v1.0, 2011-09-19
:title: Review - Play Framework Cookbook
:tags: [book,playframework]


This article is
a review of http://www.packtpub.com/play-framework-cookbook/book[Play Framework
Cookbook] - a new
book about the http://www.playframework.org/[Play framework] from
http://www.packtpub.com/[Packt Publishing] under the Packt Open Source
brand.

*This book goes way beyond the Play framework documentation, and
includes useful practical techniques and source code for Play developers
at every level. Every Play developer should have a copy of this book.*

== Introduction

http://www.packtpub.com/play-framework-cookbook/book[image:play-framework-cookbook.png[Play
Framework Cookbook]]__Play Framework Cookbook__ is a significant book,
because it is the first Play framework book in print from a major
publisher, following the http://the-play-book.co.uk/[Introducing the
Play! Framework] e-book (also available as a
http://www.lulu.com/product/paperback/introducing-the-play-framework/14926666[paperback
from Lulu]. Packt describe themselves as an on-demand publisher, and
have beat the other major publishers to market with this book, as they
did with their
http://www.packtpub.com/jboss-drools-business-rules/book[Drools]
http://www.packtpub.com/drools-jboss-rules-50-developers-guide/book[books]
two years ago. Perhaps
http://hilton.org.uk/computer_books.phtml[O’Reilly] is no longer
http://macdevcenter.com/pub/a/mac/2002/05/14/oreilly_wwdc_keynote.html[watching
the alpha geeks]
(http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-3436067109364123518[video]
from 9:15).

This is a ‘cookbook’, split into ‘recipes’ that each show you how to do
one thing, and include the code you need to do it yourself. This skips
the very basics, since you don't buy a book for that, and lets the
concepts and discussion remain second to simply getting things done.

This kind of book lends itself well to the cookbook format, which avoids
attempting to cover a range of topics in equal detail, in the way that a
manual does. Instead, the book contains task-oriented tutorial-style
content, which is a useful way to structure a book about practical
techniques. This is not a reference that explains every detail of Play.

== Overview

Although this is not strictly necessary for the cookbook format, this
book is split into seven chapters.

. Basics of the Play Framework
. Using Controllers
. Leveraging Modules
. Creating and Using APIs
. Introduction to Writing Modules
. Practical Module Examples
. Running Into Production
. Appendix: Further Information About the Play Framework

Many computer books suffer from too much introductory content, with long
descriptions of how to do the easy things, providing a more basic
description of what is already included in the manual. Fortunately,
getting started and using Play by itself is only a minority of the book:
only the first chapter includes basic recipes for tasks that are covered
more briefly in the Play documentation.

This book is mostly about how to use Play with other technologies:
integration with components from broader web and enterprise
architectures. This is where a book can go further than the Play
framework documentation, and where this particular book does.

Once you start to understand the Play framework better, it actually
makes a lot of sense that most of the chapters are about modules. This
is because the ideally-structured Play application only contains domain
specific data and logic, with functionality that is not domain-specific
moved into modules. This book covers topics such as persistence,
caching, search, reporting, security and third-party API integration:
these are all cross-domain concerns that can be implemented in modules.

== Contents

The book starts well, with a foreword that sets the scene with two key
observations. First, when you build web applications, it is better to
embrace standard web technologies instead of hiding HTTP features under
an abstraction layer. Second, a lot of software developers like the Java
language and the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) run-time environment, which
has a lot to offer compared to PHP and Ruby on Rails, for example.

Recipes progress to advanced topics, so Play developers at all levels
can learn how to do more with the framework.

[[ch1]]
=== Chapter 1 - basics

The first chapter covers the basics of getting started with the Play
framework. This is pretty much all covered in the Play documentation’s
tutorial, which makes this the weakest chapter in the book, but that
does not make the recipes any less useful. What this chapter does better
than the Play documentation is to identify a subset of tasks that you
need to know how to do to be productive with Play, before moving onto
more advanced topics.

[[ch2]]
=== Chapter 2 - controllers

Chapter 2 focuses on keeping controllers clean, with custom code and
Play modules for additional features. There are some great examples of
how to do this, such as the PDF example which shows you how to implement
a custom renderer to avoid adding custom render logic to your
controllers.

This is perhaps the most important chapter in the book, because the
controller layer is where the benefits of Play’s simple but flexible and
powerful approach are most apparent: HTTP routing, HTTP request
parameter binding, input validation and generating other response types.
These are all covered by recipes in this chapter.

The odd one out is the annotation-based routing recipe, since this uses
a third-party module (developed by my colleague,
link:/author/nicolas-leroux[Nicolas Leroux]) instead of Play framework
core functionality. This is also the only recipe that is an alternative
solution to a task covered by a previous recipe, in this case the
‘Defining routes’ recipe in the previous chapter.

[[ch3]]
=== Chapter 3 - using modules

Chapter 3 - the shortest chapter in the book - is something of an
anomaly. This chapter contains recipes that demonstrate several
third-party Play modules. This is certainly useful, and gives a good
insight into how modules can provide powerful extensions to Play’s core
functionality.

However, it does seem a little odd to provide recipes for just five
modules from the 95 http://www.playframework.org/modules[Play framework
modules] available at the time of writing, because a cookbook for how to
use the many modules is worth a whole book by itself, especially since
many of the modules do not have extensive documentation.

In any case, it is useful to see a few examples of the available
modules, to prompt further investigation of the Play module repository.

[[ch4]]
=== Chapter 4 - using third-party APIs

Chapter 4 follows on from previous chapters by extending the approach
used for writing controllers and using modules to recipes that cover
integration with third-party APIs. This is an important part of building
a modern web application, and this chapter does a good job of picking
recipes that demonstrate the different features that Play provides for
this: using tags to modularise view template fragments, making web
service requests to external services, mapping JSON and XML data,
asynchronous requests and caching.

The recipes in this chapter make this all seem easy, which it is, even
though these would normally be fairly advanced web application
development topics.

[[ch5]]
=== Chapter 5 - writing modules

Chapter 5 demystifies the business of writing Play modules, which
isolate application functionality and make it available to other
applications. This is another very useful set of recipes, because when
you are getting started with Play it can take a while to get into the
habit of modularising your Play applications. An explanation of how to
do it is not nearly as helpful as examples that show you how.

This chapter introduces more advanced techniques: as plug-ins, events,
Python commands, using a service interface to prevent a module depending
on your application, and using bytecode enhancement to allow a module to
modify application code at run-time.

[[ch6]]
=== Chapter 6 - module examples

The third chapter about modules combines the ideas from the previous two
chapters by showing how Play modules can integrate third-party libraries
with Play’s APIs so you can use them as if they were built-in to Play as
core functionality. These recipes include model class enhancement to use
a non-JPA persistence framework or add full-text search functionality,
integrating Play plug-in messages with JMS and replacing the distributed
cache implementation.

This chapter’s recipes show you how accessible Play makes this kind of
advanced integration, with examples that you can adapt. It is only a
shame that there is no example of replacing Play’s Groovy templates with
an alternative template engine, to expand the demonstration of how much
of what Play provides is pluggable.

[[ch7]]
=== Chapter 7 - running in production

The last chapter is the most promising, because continuous integration
and production deployment are tasks that edge towards the black arts of
devops and system administration. These are perhaps the most practical
and useful recipes, because they cover necessary tasks that software
developers often lack specialist skills for. This covers a collection of
tools including Jenkins, Apache, Nginx, Lighttpd, as well as techniques
such as virtual host and SSL configuration.

However, the description of Play application deployment is tantalisingly
incomplete. Play currently lacks a standard file distribution and server
deployment model, such as the cross-platform WAR deployment supported by
Java EE application servers. As with the previous chapter, although the
scope of a book like this always has to be limited, it would still have
been nice to see platform-specific packaging and deployment instructions
for platforms like Debian and Red Hat linux.

[[appendix]]
=== Appendix - links to more information

The appendix is a collection of links to several other modules and
sources of information about the Play framework. It’s awesome. I would
say that, though, because it includes a link to the
http://www.lunatech-research.com/[Lunatech Research web site], where I
have published several Play articles, and a list of Twitter accounts,
including my own as well as the other Play committers’.

== Criticisms

Although this book is well-written and contains relevant content, the
layout and typography could certainly be better. The biggest problem is
that the code samples are all set in a Courier typeface that is too
large, so that lines wrap randomly, made worse by the random number of
spaces used to indent code blocks. There are much better monospace
typefaces for use in print. The headings are also bizarrely ugly.

Occasionally the structure of the recipes themselves could be improved.
Some of the recipes describe concepts without doing a good job of having
a clearly-identified task. For example, ‘Understanding session
management’ is no more of a recipe than ‘understanding kitchen hygiene’
would be in a conventional cook book; ‘Sticky Chocolate Cake’ - that is
what I call a recipe.

== Conclusion

The bottom line for a computer book is the combination of the relevance,
depth and level of the technical content. This is where _Play Framework
Cookbook_ delivers, and this is why it deserves its place on the
bookshelf, be it physical or electronic. Although there is room for
improvement, all of the other possible (possibly better) Play framework
books fail on account of not having been published yet. There is room
for more books on this subject, so perhaps we shall see the following
hypothetical titles on the shelves in the future.

* _Learning the Play Framework_ - a gentler introduction that does not
assume Java knowledge.
* _Building web applications with Play and Scala_ - because not everyone
uses Java on the JVM any more.
* _Play Modules Cookbook_ - because there are more Play modules than
there are recipes in _Play Framework Cookbook_.
* _Programming Play 2.0_ - because http://www.playframework.org/2.0[Play
2.0] will introduce significant changes +
(*Update: we decided to fix this ourselves and write
http://www.lunatech-research.com/books[our own books about Play 2]*)

Meanwhile, every Play developer should read _Play Framework Cookbook_.
