--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Progress bars with jQuery UI, WebSocket & Play"
tags: playframework JQuery author: Peter Hilton summary: "This article
shows you how to use a [jQuery UI](http://jqueryui.com/) component and
Web Sockets to implement a progress bar for a deterministic asynchronous
server-side job in a [Play framework](http://www.playframework.org/) web
application. This is an example of a user-interface component that is
not part of the web’s stateless request-response paradigm, but is now
possible with new HTML5 features." ---

This follows on from earlier jQuery UI component articles:
http://blog.lunatech.com/2011/07/05/jquery-ui-ajax-autocomplete-playframework[jQuery
UI Ajax autocomplete with Play],
http://blog.lunatech.com/2011/08/10/lazy-loading-jquery-ui-ajax-play[Lazy
loading page content with jQuery UI, Ajax and Play] and
http://blog.lunatech.com/2011/10/11/selector-dialog-jquery-ui-ajax-playframework[Selector
dialogue with jQuery UI, Ajax and Play]. The examples and source code
for all of these articles are available as part of the Play framework
http://www.playframework.org/modules/jqueryui[jQuery UI module].

For this example, we are going to start a long-running job in our web
application on the server, and display progress in real-time:

image:jqueryui-progress.png[Progress bar example]

Note that this time we are not using a time zones example, although the
recent
http://blog.joda.org/2011/10/today-time-zone-database-was-closed.html[time
zone database debacle] seems to have been
http://blog.joda.org/2011/10/time-zone-database-rebooted.html[largely
resolved].

== Architecture

The http://www.w3.org/TR/webarch/[Architecture of the World Wide Web] is
about resources and their identifiers and representations, and while we
are used to the original web of HTML documents and URLs, resources and
representations can be richer. The key resource in this progress bar
example is a server-side process.

The Play framework includes support for starting asynchronous
server-side jobs - processes that continue running outside the scope of
the HTTP request-response cycle. This is useful for important tasks that
must be completed independently of the user’s navigation behaviour, such
as sending hundreds of party invitation e-mails. The challenge with
these long-running jobs is to use URIs to identify them as ‘resources’
in the web architecture sense, and to provide useful representations.

For this example, we will use a web socket URI to address an
asynchronous job, and on the server-side generate a representation
consisting of only a single number - the job’s completion percentage.
Play’s web sockets support is ideal for updating the progress bar, and
Play’s asynchronous jobs are suitable for long-running jobs.

Note that web sockets support on both server-side and client-side is
still evolving. This example works with Play 1.2.3 and Safari 5.1.1;
Play 1.2.4 adds Chrome support.

[[progressbar]]
== Progress bar

The jQuery UI http://jqueryui.com/demos/progressbar/[progress bar]
widget shows progress for a server-side process for which the completion
percentage can be calculated. Progress bars are useful for processes
that take longer than a few seconds to complete, provided that they are
deterministic, i.e. processes whose progress can be measured or
predicted.

=== Client

The widget is based on an empty HTML div element.

[source,brush:,html;,gutter:,false]
----
<div id="progressbar" data-url="@@{jqueryui.ProgressSocket.progress(processId)}"></div>
----

The `data-url` attribute value specifies the URL for a web socket
connection. Note that the template uses the `@@` syntax to generate an
absolute URL that includes the web socket protocol -
`ws://localhost:9000/progressbar/progress`.

The `progressbar.js` JavaScript applies the jQuery UI dialog plug-in to
the `div` element and opens a web socket connection. Finally, the
JavaScript uses web socket messages to update the progress bar value.

[source,brush:,javascript;,gutter:,false]
----
$(function() {

   // Initialise the progress bar.
   var $progressbar = $('#progressbar').progressbar();

   // Open the web socket connection.
   var serverUrl = $progressbar.data('url');
   var socket = new WebSocket(serverUrl);

   // Use web socket messages to update the progress bar.
   socket.onmessage = function(event) {
      $progressbar.progressbar('value', parseInt(event.data));
   };
});
----

=== Server

The server-side has three parts. First, we define an implementation of a
long-running job, which has a generated UUID identifier and an event
stream that the job will publish progress to. The implementation in this
example simply waits for short intervals, publishing progress to the
event stream after each one.

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
package models.jqueryui;

import play.jobs.Job;
import play.libs.Codec;
import play.libs.F;

import java.io.Serializable;
import java.util.HashMap;
import java.util.Map;

/**
 * Example job that publishes progress as an event stream.
 */
public class Process extends Job implements Serializable {

   public static Map<String, Process> registry = new HashMap<String, Process>();

   public String id = Codec.UUID();

   /**
    * Event stream for events that report job completion percentage.
    */
   public F.EventStream<Integer> percentComplete = new F.EventStream<Integer>();

   public void doJob() {
      // Report completion percentage every 100 ms.
      for (int i = 1; i <= 50; i++) {
         try {
            Thread.sleep(100l);
            final int percent = i * 2;
            this.percentComplete.publish(percent);
         } catch (InterruptedException e) {
            // ignore
         }
      }
   }
}
----

The second server-side class is a conventional action that starts an
asynchronous long-running job, and stores a reference to the job in a
‘registry’ singleton. This action then renders the same page with a
`processId` argument that indicates that a job has been started.

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
package controllers.jqueryui;

import models.jqueryui.Process;

/**
 * Progressbar example.
 */
public class Progressbar extends JQueryUI {

   /**
    * Start a job, cache it and re-render the page
    */
   public static void startJob() {
      final Process process = new Process();
      process.now();
      final String processId = process.id;
      Process.registry.put(processId, process);
      renderTemplate("jqueryui/Progressbar/index.html", processId);
   }
}
----

The last part is a web socket controller that retrieves the running job
from the registry, using its ID, and waits for events on the job’s event
stream. When the job publishes a completion percentage to its event
stream, the controller sends the data in a web socket message to the
browser client.

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
package controllers.jqueryui;

import models.jqueryui.Process;
import play.libs.F;
import play.mvc.Http;
import play.mvc.WebSocketController;

import static play.libs.F.Matcher.ClassOf;

/**
 * Web socket controller for use by the progress bar.
 */
public class ProgressSocket extends WebSocketController {

   public static void progress(final String processId) {

      final Process process = Process.registry.get(processId);
      final F.EventStream<Integer> progress = process.percentComplete;

      // Loop while the socket is open
      while (inbound.isOpen()) {

         // Wait for either an inbound socket event or a process progress event.
         F.Either<Http.WebSocketEvent, Integer> e = await(F.Promise.waitEither(
            inbound.nextEvent(),
            progress.nextEvent()
         ));

         // Case: The socket has been closed
         for (Http.WebSocketClose closed : Http.WebSocketEvent.SocketClosed.match(e._1)) {
            disconnect();
         }

         // Case: percentComplete published - send the value to the client.
         for (Integer percentComplete : ClassOf(Integer.class).match(e._2)) {
            outbound.send(percentComplete.toString());
            if (percentComplete >= 100) {
               disconnect();
            }
         }
      }
   }

}
----

Note that this design means that the job is started by a conventional
HTTP POST request to the `Progressbar.startJob()` action, which means
that the job is executed even if the client does not have web socket
support and is therefore unable to update the progress bar.

One possible enhancement would be to add JavaScript to detect the case
where web sockets are not supported, and send a single Ajax request to
get the current progress value to update the progress bar.

== Conclusion

Web sockets are an HTML5 technology that you can now use in your web
applications, thanks to browser support for the JavaScript API and
Play’s server-side support. This is good news for developers who can see
opportunities to improve user-experience in their applications with more
sophisticated applications.

_link:/author/peter-hilton[Peter Hilton] is a senior software developer
at Lunatech Research and committer on the Play open-source project._
