--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Play Framework 1.2 - Better JSON serialization with
FlexJSON" tags: Java playframework JSON author: Erik Bakker summary:
"When writing rich interfaces, you often have to generate a JSON
representation of your data to be used in your HTML templates. [Play
framework](http://www.playframework.org/) 1.2 comes bundled with
Google’s JSON library [Gson](http://code.google.com/p/google-gson/), but
the developers of this library have made some design choices that keep
it from being ideal for generating JSON that is going to be sent to the
HTTP client." ---

[[PlayFramework-BetterJSONserializationwithFlexJSON-Objective]]
== Objective

We want to be able to create multiple different JSON views on the same
object, to be used in our Play templates. This is useful, because
entities are often used in several contexts. A news item may be shown
with only a few details in a listing of news items, with more details on
a separate page for that news item, and with even more details for an
editor of the website.

[[PlayFramework-BetterJSONserializationwithFlexJSON-ProblemswithGson]]
== Problems with Gson

When you use Gson, the default JSON representation of a class is a map
with key-value pairs that represent the field names and their values.
Serialization is done recursively, which poses the first problem, namely
that you cannot serialize objects that have circular references. In a
Play application, structures like these are very common. Consider the
following two classes:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
@Entity
public class Post extends Model {
    @ManyToOne
    public Author author;
    public String title;
    public Integer views;
    public String content; 
}
----

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
@Entity
public class Author extends Model {
    public String name;
    @OneToMany(mappedBy="author")
    public Set<Post> posts; 
}
----

Trying to serialize an instance of either of them with Gson will fail
with the following error:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
IllegalStateException occured : circular reference error Offending field: author Offending object: com.google.gson.ObjectTypePair@1
----

What happens is that during serialization of a post, the author is
recursively serialized, which holds a reference to the post, thereby
causing a circular reference which would lead to infinitely deep JSON
trees.

There are more problems with Gson. By default, Gson serializes all
fields of an object, except `transient` fields. Additional fields can be
excluded by implementing your own `ExclusionStrategy`. This
include-by-default behaviour seems perfectly reasonable when you use the
JSON representation to transfer an object between multiple systems. We
however want to use the JSON to show parts of an object to clients. For
our purpose, it is much more practical to explicitly include fields than
to explicitly exclude them. For example, suppose that we add a password
field to our `Author` class. If fields are included by default, the
password would be visible in JSON output if we forget to also explicitly
exclude it in the `ExclusionStrategy`. On the other hand, if we would
use a system where we had to explicitly include fields, no harm would
come to us if we added a password field to the `Author` class.

Gson can be switched into a mode where it excludes fields by default,
and includes only fields that are annotated with `@Expose`. This seems
nice at first, but this couples the JSON representation definition with
the model itself, which conflicts with our objectives. After all, we
wanted to have multiple different JSON views on an object. The ‘content’
of a post should be included on the details page, but not on the listing
page. In other words, we want the definition of the JSON view to be part
of the serializer, of which we can have many, instead of being part of
the class we are serializing.

Even this is possible with Gson, for we can create an
`ExclusionStrategy` that excludes by default, and includes only
explicitly named fields. We can also have multiple exclusion strategies,
so we can satisfy our objective. However, writing an `ExclusionStrategy`
that works well with nested objects is extremely cumbersome.

Taking it all together, the circular reference issues, the including by
default and the cumbersome exclusion strategies make Gson not ideal for
generating JSON to use in a template.

[[PlayFramework-BetterJSONserializationwithFlexJSON-FlexJSON]]
== FlexJSON

With FlexJSON, it is very easy to specify which fields you want to
serialize, even with nested objects. Take for example this serializer
for a details view of a post:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
JSONSerializer postDetailsSerializer = new JSONSerializer().include(
                "title",
                "content",
                "author.name").exclude("*");
----

This serializer includes the title and content of the post object, and
also the name of the author. As you can see, you can specify which
fields of nested objects to include simply by adding a dot to the field
followed by the field of the nested object. To serialize a post object,
we can now use

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
postDetailsSerializer.serialize(post);
----

To have a JSON view of a post without the content, we can simply create
another serializer:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
JSONSerializer postListSerializer = new JSONSerializer().include(
                "title",
                "author.name").exclude("*");
----

To use FlexJSON in your Play application, download the latest version
from http://flexjson.sourceforge.net/ and put the jar into the `lib`
folder in your Play application.

FlexJSON may not suit all your needs, but will help you out in a whole
lot of cases. Remember, you don't have to fully switch to FlexJSON to
take advantage of it, you can still use other JSON libraries might the
need arise in a given situation.

[[PlayFramework-BetterJSONserializationwithFlexJSON-Convenienceclasses]]
== Convenience classes

We can easily use these serializers from our view templates, if we
create a
http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.2/templates#Createcustomextensions[custom
Java object extension]:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
/**
 * Extensions for the template system.
 */
public class SerializerExtensions extends JavaExtensions {
    /**
     * Serialize a model to JSON with a given serializer.
     */
    public static String serializeWith(Object model, String serializer) throws IllegalArgumentException, SecurityException, IllegalAccessException, NoSuchFieldException {
        JSONSerializer js = (JSONSerializer) Serializers.class.getField(serializer).get(null);
        return js.serialize(model);
    }
    
    /**
     * Serialize a list of models to JSON with a given serializer.
     */
    public static String serializeWith(Collection<Object> models, String serializer) throws IllegalArgumentException, SecurityException, IllegalAccessException, NoSuchFieldException {
        JSONSerializer js = (JSONSerializer) Serializers.class.getField(serializer).get(null);
        return js.serialize(models);
    }
}
----

With this code in place, we can easily convert a single model or a
collection of models into JSON, while in a Play template:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
<script type="text/javascript">
  var post = ${post.serializeWith('postDetailsSerializer').raw()};
</script>
----

This works equally for a collection of posts:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
<script type="text/javascript">
  var posts = ${posts.serializeWith('postListSerializer').raw()};
</script>
----

The Java extension gets the relevant serializers from the `Serializers`
class, which holds static references:

[source,brush:,java;,gutter:,false]
----
public class Serializers {
    public static final JSONSerializer postListSerializer;
    public static final JSONSerializer postDetailsSerializer;
    
    static {
        boolean prettyPrint = Play.mode == Mode.DEV; 
        
        postListSerializer = new JSONSerializer().include(
                "title",
                "author.name").exclude("*").prettyPrint(prettyPrint);
        
        postDetailsSerializer = new JSONSerializer().include(
                "title",
                "author.name",
                "content").exclude("*").prettyPrint(prettyPrint);
    }
}
----

In development mode, we get pretty printed JSON, while in production
mode the JSON is more compact.

[[PlayFramework-BetterJSONserializationwithFlexJSON-Notes]]
== Notes

You might want to instantiate Serializers differently to the approach
used in this example. For example, you can choose to store them as
fields of the class they are supposed to serialize. Be aware of
multithreading issues though. A serializer is thread-safe, but only when
you do not call the `include` or `exclude` methods. If you do have to
call those from your request handling threads, be very careful.
Multithreading problems might show up only in production mode, since by
default only a single thread is used in development mode.

[[PlayFramework-BetterJSONserializationwithFlexJSON-Conclusion]]
== Conclusion

The design choices made for GSON do not make it very suitable for
generating JSON that is going to be used in your application templates.
With FlexJSON, it is much easier to create multiple views on the same
data, which is extremely useful in web applications. With custom Java
extensions, FlexJSON serialization can be used seamlessly from your
templates.

_link:/author/eamelink[Erik Bakker] is a software developer at Lunatech
Research, and http://twitter.com/#!/eamelink[@eamelink] on Twitter._
