--- layout: article drupal-format: Filtered HTML title: "A two month
internship at Lunatech" tags: internship author: Ludovico Fischer
summary: "I moved to Rotterdam at the beginning of February 2011 to
start a two month internship as a software developer at Lunatech." ---

When you get to the Lunatech office (about twenty minutes distance form
Rotterdam Central station), you will be struck by how much the site
looks like a private home. It is located in a two storey building
bordering a very quiet street sidewalk along a small canal.

Inside, the walls are decorated with artwork from local artists and it
is very quiet. It is not the quiet of abandon, though, but the quiet of
concentration. Lunatech is a den of first rate international software
developers and product creators; if you join them, you will work a lot
and you will learn a lot.

I was given a twin-monitor workstation in a spacious room on the first
floor that I shared with three other team members and put to work on a
real project, a very interesting Java web application that I cannot
divulge too much of at the present. Suffice it to say, Lunatech is
building it by trying to leverage the web architecture to the most and
doing away with a lot of the trappings of classical Java enterprise
applications.

My supervisors, Sietse de Kaper and Erik Bakker, sat in the same room
with me, and were never shy to give advice when I needed it,
contributing a sizeable amount of time to explain architecture choices
and the why and how of the code. In any development work, especially at
the junior level, a lot hangs on picking up the house style and getting
a feel for the style of your team mates. Every developer at Lunatech is
extremely above average, so you will improve your technique a lot just
by going through this process.

Even though someone was always there if I needed advice, after the first
days I was generally trusted to be able to work autonomously. That how
things work at Lunatech: people are trusted to know what they are doing.
This means you get lots of room, even as an intern, to take your own
initiative, and that you must not shy away from responsibility. In fact,
most developers interact with the clients directly and contribute to the
development road map. You will learn the need to estimate and control
the time spent on any given task. It is your job to deliver features in
time.

At Lunatech, I experienced both a high level of software craftmanship
and considerable commercial savviness; the combination was definitely
illuminating. This does not imply that the homely first impression is
contradicted. On the contrary, diligence and concentration go hand in
hand with an easygoing style with scents of a well bred country
household.

I want to thank everybody who made this experience possible, and in
special manner Sietse de Kaper and Erik Bakker, who provided patiently
provided me with advice throughout the period.

_http://ludovf.net/[Ludovico Fischer], based in Brussels, did a
two-month programming internship at Lunatech in 2011, during the final
year of his Open University degree course in mathematics._
