--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Browsers don’t do layout" tags: front-end UX author:
Egor Kloos summary: "Good layout has been the bane of many front-enders
existance for years and years. Positioning isn't layout and tables and
floats are nasty hacks. Browsers totally suck at layout." ---

There have been drafts published to the http://www.w3.org/[W3C] on
constructing grids, flexible boxes and multiple columns. Have the
browsers seen fit to implement these recommendations? Apparently they
haven't put much effort into this at all. Some browsers have partially
implemented multiple columns. But not all, so it's useless.

Microsoft has just released version 9 of their web browser client and it
has come a long way towards converging on a more uniform usage of the
web stack. In other words; Microsoft is still playing catch-up.

IE10 hopes to address that. Yes, IE9 is barely out the door and the
preview of the next version has already been released.

This time next year the holy grail of web layouts may be upon us. Web
page layout is in my view more important than 3D transforms, <video>,
<canvas> or any other fancy-pants media manipulation stuff.

Stephen Hay has also been
http://www.the-haystack.com/presentations/fronteers09/[banging on about
this] for some time now and has given
http://www.slideshare.net/stephenhay/realworld-responsive-design-breaking-development-2011[presentations
on the problem]. It looks like he'll be
http://blogs.msdn.com/b/ie/archive/2011/04/12/native-html5-first-ie10-platform-preview-available-for-download.aspx[granted
his wish].

IE10 will include all the things we need for high-powered CSS layouts:

. http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-mediaqueries/[Media Queries] - allowing CSS
rules to depend on the display
. http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-flexbox/[Flexbox] - layout based on boxes
. http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-grid-layout/[Grid Layout] - similar to
http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-layout/[Template Module]
. http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-multicol/[Multiple columns] - columns within
a block element.

The split in point 3 shows where it could all go horribly wrong if we
ever want to use this in the real world. The Grid Layout is Mircosoft's
approach and the Template Module was initiated by W3C’s own Bert Bos.
This explains why there is no layout method in browsers. Regardless
whether it is open-source, companies don't like to use the work of
others.

So if the browser vendors go their own way on layouts we, the designers
and developers, will be stuck doing it the old way because we can only
work with what browsers have in common. I'm keeping my fingers crossed
that one day we will have a native way of creating layouts for web
browsers. The Grid Layout looks like the first proper attempt at a
browser implementation and thus an obvious candidate for others to use.
Apple, Google and Mozilla may need to get of their high horse and do
what Microsoft has been doing, adopting other peoples’ good work.

_link:/author/egor-kloos[Egor Kloos] is a UX consultant at Lunatech
Research where he oversees design and front-end matters. ( aka
http://dutchcelt.nl/[dutchcelt])_
