--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "September Play!ground in Rotterdam" tags: playground
playframework event author: Peter Hilton summary: "Following the success
of the August event, we are pleased to announce another [Play
Framework](http://www.playframework.org/) event, for software developers
and technical managers." ---

This event is the perfect opportunity to learn practical techniques,
learn more about Play’s advanced features and meet other Play
developers. We also expect to have some fun.

== Details

* 16:00, Friday, 30 September 2011
* Lunatech Office -
http://maps.google.com/maps?q=Lunatech+Research,rotterdam[Heemraadssingel
70, 3021DD, Rotterdam]

== Programme

To leave more time for networking, we are going to limit the next event
to two presentations:

* 16:30 - _Integrating jQuery UI components with Play_,
link:/author/peter-hilton[Peter Hilton], Lunatech
* 17:15 - break
* 17:30 - technical presetation,
https://twitter.com/#!/spinscale[Alexander Reelsen], author of
http://blog.lunatech.com/2011/09/19/playframework-cookbook-review[Play
Framework Cookbook]
* 18:15 - drinks, networking

The programme will begin with a presentation of how to integrate jQuery
UI widgets in a Play application. User-interface ‘components’ must be
important, because when Matt Raible
http://raibledesigns.com/rd/entry/my_comparing_jvm_web_frameworks[compared
JVM web frameworks] last December, he gave the
http://www.playframework.org/[Play framework] _null points_ for
‘components’. Although it is accurate to say that Play does not have
‘components’, in the sense that Play does not ship with a UI component
toolkit/library/framework/whatever, but it also misses the point. This
is because Play is designed to make it easy to use whatever client-side
JavaScript-based user-interface layer you choose. For this presentation,
http://jqueryui.com/[jQuery UI] components _are_ Play UI components.

For the second presentation, Alexander Reelsen is flying over from
Munich. This presentation about Play’s internals will look behind the
curtain to reveal how some of Play’s magic works. We also hope that
Alexander will sign our copies of his
http://blog.lunatech.com/2011/09/19/playframework-cookbook-review[excellent
book].

As always, beer and networking are an essential part of the programme.

== Registration

http://www.lunatech-research.com/event/register/lunatech-labs/playground-september-2011[Register]
for this event.
