--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "The double-sided Scrum board" tags: delivery
Scrum-guide author: Peter Hilton summary: "In theory, Scrum is a
collection of simple practices. It sounds easy, but Reality Scrum™ is a
game of compromise and adapting Scrum principles to the situation at
hand. Constraints breed creativity, and that’s where interesting new
ideas come from. Like the double-sided Scrum board." ---

image:double-sided-scrum-board.jpg[A double-sided scrum board]

[[room]]
== The Scrum Board doesn’t fit in the room

I’m currently working as a Scrum Master (and coach) on a development
team that has a great working environment, but not enough room for a big
Scrum board in the main room. The Scrum board is on the other side of
the glass wall that separates the room from the corridor, which is
great, because it means that there’s lots of room for it and we don’t
disturb other people when we have our Daily Scrum.

The only problem is that team members can’t see the Scrum board from
where they sit. Fortunately, we’re using
http://www.atlassian.com/software/jira/overview[JIRA]
http://www.atlassian.com/software/greenhopper/overview[with
GreenHopper].

[[tools]]
== Software tools

Using JIRA and GreenHooper as the project collaboration tool allows team
members (and external stakeholders) to see the sprint status in a web
browser. This isn’t supposed to matter, because they’re supposed to be
in the room, or observing at Scrum meetings otherwise. But they’re not
and they don’t.

Using JIRA to track the development work-flow leads to the additional
benefit of having a recorded time line of status changes and hours
logged, because we use JIRA for time-tracking. Again, this isn’t
supposed to matter, but this is the Netherlands which means that almost
all of the team members work fewer than five days per week, and
sometimes want to see what happened when they weren’t there.

The software tools give you a way to capture what happened and when,
which provides visibility for team members and stakeholders who are
separated by time and space.

[[board]]
== Physical Scrum Board

Software tools are all very well, and software developers do like their
software, but they lack the simple immediacy of the ever-present
physical Scrum Board, which is why we have one of those as well.
Maintaining a Scrum board in both GreenHopper and on the wall is not
entirely duplicated effort, though.

At the start of the sprint, I can just print the story cards from
GreenHopper and stick them on the front of the yellow stickies, which
saves a lot of work with the marker pen. Best of all, the stickies only
need to be physical proxies for the JIRA issues, that capture discussion
with the Product Owner and other information that emerges during
development.

The glass wall makes it possible to link the physical Scrum Board with
user stories in JIRA by making the Scrum Board double-sided. The back of
each story card shows the JIRA issue number, so you can see at a glance
where each story is. Issue numbers tend to stick in your head while
you’re working on them, and there are only three or four in progress at
a time - 524, 80 and 366 in the photo, above.

Just don’t forget to read the board from right to left, since you’re
looking at the back.

[.image-wrap]#image:double-sided-scrum-board-annotated.jpg?version=2&modificationDate=1343381700790[image]#

This double-sided Scrum board shows:

. four user stories are not started; the next one is SP-418.
. SP-524 is in progress (the second sticky shows UX details)
. the user story SP-80 is being tested
. SP-366 is ready for a mid-Scrum demo to the Product Owner
. seven user stories are done, including one - SP-522 - that was
completed out of order
. emergency equipment, in case of fire or injury during the Daily Scrum.

== Conclusion

When you can’t do Scrum ‘by the book’, you often discover that a little
creativity reveals an approach that’s just as good. Besides, there is no
‘book’.

It is good to be wary of Scrum process support software, like
GreenHopper, because it’s easy to get caught up in the intricacies of
the tool and customising it to follow the evolving Scrum process, while
losing the benefits of a tangible Scrum Board. However, a good tool is
also an opportunity to layer information: the Scrum Board can also
consist of sticky ‘links’ to the JIRA issues that contain more detailed
information.

https://plus.google.com/107170847819841716154/posts/ja13Pf1t7hC[Comments
on Google+]

_link:/author/peter-hilton[Peter Hilton] is a senior software developer
at Lunatech Research, currently coaching a Scrum team for one of
Lunatech’s customers, and co-author of the book
http://bit.ly/playforscala[Play for Scala] (Manning)._
