--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Database access in a stateless world" tags:
playframework web-applications author: Ludovico Fischer summary: "JPA
(the [Java Persistence API](http://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=317))
sometimes does a little too much for its own good. Distinctions between
managed and unmanaged entities or between save() and merge() are
relevant when most objects stay in memory a long time, and are
‘synchronized’ with the database at different intervals during their
lifetime." ---

In a http://www.playframework.org/[Play! framework] application,
persistent data is rarely kept in memory for more than a single request.
Hence an entity is going to be saved to the database almost after every
time it is modfied. Because this is not the workflow JPA designers had
in mind, sometimes JPA gets in the way.

[[Databaseaccessinastatelessworld-JPAinastatelesscontext]]
== JPA in a stateless world

Your controller receives a JSON message with information about an item.
In Play!, you use the id in the JSON message to retrieve the object from
the database, then use the information in the JSON message to set the
entity’s properties, then save the entity again. This means that you are
forced to perform a `SELECT` just to be able to perform the update which
comes after.

The reason is that JPA is designed for frameworks which keep entities
floating around in memory longer than the request scope: in that case
the problem is supposed to go away, because JPA can do its magic to give
the illusion of seamless correspondence between the object graph and the
database. Except we know that it’s not always so seamless.

[[Databaseaccessinastatelessworld-Lookingforanalternative]]
== Looking for an alternative

Since Play! avoids storing the application state on the JVM heap and
prefers
http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.2.4/cache[Memcached] to
enhance database access performance, most of the data entering your
application will not be part of any persistence context. Your entities
will also be saved to the database or to the cache pretty fast after
they have been created. That’s great: we can drop the complexity that
derive from the premise that the object graph has its own state to be
managed separately by the persistence solution.

Play! applications can benefit from simpler persistence. The persistence
layer can be a much thinner abstraction, that would allow to express
relational operations in a safe way, but would stay out of the way of
session management, except for providing access to the database
transaction management features (i.e. some kind of commit() and
rollback())

Unfortunately, there are not many Java libraries that fit the bill
(although I personally like http://www.mybatis.org/[myBatis]). As Play!
introduced new thinking in the Java world by moving away from the
servlet API, maybe it could also serve as a catalyst for new approaches
to dealing with databases in Java (Scala, on the other hand, has got its
own share of http://scalaquery.org/[innovative]
http://squeryl.org/[solutions] already).

_link:/author/ludovico-fischer[Ludovico Fischer] is a software developer
at Lunatech Research._
