--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Planning Scrum project documentation" tags: Scrum
documentation author: Peter Hilton summary: "A Scrum team and external
stakeholders must agree how much time to spend on documentation; ‘none’
is almost certainly the wrong answer." ---

[[where]]
== Where’s the documentation?

It’s Monday morning and the finance guy wants to know where the
documentation is. This is somewhat disconcerting because half of the
team doesn’t know who he is, let alone why he’s suddenly interested in a
software development project, and because of the look on his face when
you tell him that there isn’t any. So you talk.

It turns out that although this looks like just another productive Scrum
project, from the development team’s point of view, there’s something
missing. There’s great visibility of how things are going right now but
there’s no long-term plan, and the external stakeholders are getting
nervous, because they’re missing some sense of what the ‘whole project’
is. So they start picking on the lack of documentation.

Software project and system documentation used to come for ‘free’, on
development projects that cost too much. Before agile software
development, methodology focused on processes that anyone could
systematically follow. This tended to result in lots of intermediate
documentation intended to demonstrate that the process was being
followed correctly, instead of more efficient but unverifiable verbal
communication. This does not mean that this documentation wasn’t useful.
It was useful, but expensive.

Business people who are new to agile software development may be
surprised by and nervous about the lack of documentation. Without
detailed functional specifications, how can there be agreement between
business stakeholders and software developers? The answer is that agile
software development involves talking to people. The lack of
documentation doesn’t mean that the conversation isn’t taking place.

It is surprisingly difficult to get used to the idea that agile software
development focuses on producing the _software_ - if you want other more
tangible deliverables then you'll probably have to take care of them
yourself.

Scrum doesn’t explicitly plan much in the way of documentation, but that
doesn't have to stop you using Scrum principles and your Scrum process
to add them to your project if necessary.

[[developer]]
== Developer documentation

It’s another Monday morning, it’s the middle of the sprint and the
development team is humming along nicely - everyone’s doing fine. Except
for the new guy. He’s just joined the team and is feeling frustrated
because the software is complex enough and difficult to understand, and
the rest of the team don’t appreciate being interrupted with all of the
‘what does this mean?’ questions.

It turns out that the problem is that the data model is just one big
ball of jargon and that once you understand that you can work everything
else. Given that this is a pretty common issue in domain-specific
software, you know what to do: you add a technical task to write a data
dictionary. This will de-jargonify the system by defining what every
entity and attribute means, what it’s for, and what its data looks like.

A Scrum development team needs some basic system and functional design
documentation. System documentation, such as a
http://blog.lunatech.com/2012/08/15/scrum-development-environment-documentation[development
environment set-up guide], smoothes over the disruption caused by team
member changes. Functional design documentation, such as a functional
overview or data dictionary, makes communication more effective by
defining what the software is about and what the jargon means.

When the team writes documentation for itself, this is an overhead task
that is intended to support software development. The goal of spending
time on this documentation is to _increase_ velocity, not to support
some ideal that there should be certain kinds of documentation. This
means that there is no reason to involve the Product Owner in planning
this kind of documentation.

The best approach is to budget this documentation as a fixed small
overhead per sprint. This can either be a fixed time budget or a
technical task. For example, team members might take it in turns to
spend one hour per week updating documentation, or half an hour each, or
to schedule a technical task to add or update one document every sprint.

[[stakeholder]]
== External stakeholder documentation

It’s Friday afternoon, and the project is basically ‘done’. The last
release just passed acceptance testing and it’s going in production next
week. The last thing the development team is expecting at this point to
write functional documentation, so they’re surprised when someone from
marketing shows to ask for just that. The software might be ready, but
now there’s a press release and brochures to write, and a web site to
produce.

A software project’s business sponsors sometimes want to see some kind
of functional specification that defines what the system does. With
pictures. That’s all very well, but Scrum isn’t going to give you one of
those. Even though the Scrum process evolves, no Sprint retrospective
ever resulted in a team deciding to cancel the next two sprints and
write an old-school fifty-page* functional specification. However, a
good functional overview and pretty screen shots turn out to be useful
for related non-software activities, such as marketing.

Documentation for stakeholders outside the development team is
different, in that the development team doesn’t need it.

The team doesn’t need this documentation to develop the software, so it
is an additional deliverable. This means that it is best to make a user
story for each documentation task, and estimate and schedule it as part
of the normal Scrum process. This empowers the Product Owner to decide
how important the documentation is, compared to work on the software
itself.

[[vanity]]
== Vanity documentation

Old hands in software often reminisce about how some 1970’s software
manual was a work of literature, and all kinds of essential. Then the
web was invented, and spiral-bound historical artefacts were replaced by
HTML. Meanwhile, we sometimes get stuck with the idea that there should
be a physical ‘manual’, even though we all know deep down that no-one is
actually going to read it and that there are more accessible approaches
to software documentation.

You can’t _see_ software, but you can see a manual. If you get a nice
cover design, perhaps with retro 70s design elements, it might even look
good on the shelf. This is vanity documentation, which is the strangest
kind of documentation.

An occasional challenge in agile software development is the need to be
honest about what deliverables are for, when they’re not about finishing
the software. Occasionally, a documentation deliverable’s only real
purpose is to look good, or to make someone look good. Not only does the
development team not need this documentation to produce the software,
but no-one needs it.

This is actually just a special case of external stakeholder
documentation, with the catch that it might be difficult to get anyone
to agree that they want it enough to pay for it, without being able to
explain why. From the development team’s point of view, you can have it
if you pay for it, along with pointless features in the software itself.

[[planning]]
== Planning documentation

There are many different good reasons to be writing documentation on an
agile software development project, even though that documentation might
not be necessarily for simply developing the software with the existing
team. For planning purposes, it’s useful to consider two categories:
developer documentation and external stakeholder documentation.

Developer documentation is documentation that addresses project
impediments and improves productivity. This puts it in the same category
as other useful work that is not part of the deliverable software, such
as automated tests, and can be planned the same way. It is usually
enough to plan the occasional technical task to create or update system
documentation, rather than updating the ‘definition of done’ to include
a documentation check for every user story, because the most useful
documentation is system-level rather than feature-level documentation.

External stakeholder documentation is anything that is required beyond
the scope of the software itself, as part of the software project. When
this work competes for the same resources on the development team as
programming, it is useful to plan the same way: use user stories. This
way the documentation can be judged on the same terms as other work:
business value and cost.

* Fifty pages if you're lucky, usually more.

https://plus.google.com/107170847819841716154/posts/TscaYXPM3jm[Comments
on Google+]

_link:/author/peter-hilton[Peter Hilton] is a senior software developer
at Lunatech Research, currently coaching a Scrum team for one of
Lunatech’s customers, and co-author of the book
http://bit.ly/playforscala[Play for Scala] (Manning)._
