--- layout: article drupal-format: Unfiltered HTML, with syntax
highlighter title: "Transparent development and the project management
renaissance" tags: project-management author: Peter Hilton summary: "In
his [Reinventing Business](http://www.reinventing-business.com/)
presentation at [geecon](http://2012.geecon.org/) last month, Bruce
Eckel suggested that improving how companies operate requires
experimentation. Since then, I’ve been wondering whether the absence of
dedicated project management at Lunatech is a reproducible experiment,
rather than a random exception to the norm in software development." ---

Hypothesis: transparency and better communication let development teams
be self-managing.

Corollary: this is the start of a project management renaissance, as
project management gets more interesting.

In summary, this article asks a question: can other software development
organisations use a policy of transparency, varied Internet-based
communication tools and the occasional programmer with social skills to
remove the need to have a dedicated project manager for every
development team?

[[analogies]]
== Two analogies

On a small cargo ship, with a crew of five or six, there’s the skipper
(captain), the first mate (would-be captain), a few deck-hands (able
seamen) and the engineer. Unlike the skipper, who also has management
functions, the engineer is a senior role purely because he is a
specialist in running the ship’s ultimate back-end system: a giant
diesel engine.

Ten years ago, I was a programmer - deck hand if you like - on
development teams that typically had five or six members. There were
similar roles, although 'would-be project manager' was not explicit.
Senior to the programmers was the DBA. (I hesitate to say ‘Database
Administrator’ because it suggests a more limited scope and status than
what I experienced.)

[[dba]]
== The disappearance of the DBA

I haven’t been on a cargo ship for years, but I have noticed that during
the last ten years, the DBAs went away. First, I worked on projects that
didn’t have their own full-time DBA, but hired one in for a few days per
year. Later, I realised that I hadn’t seen a DBA anywhere on a project
for several years. What happened?

I don’t know what happened. It occurs to me that the way we use
technology has changed somewhat, so that the database is a less central
component of what we build, even though it’s always still there. Also,
we switched to open-source databases that over the same ten years have
introduced two important qualities: they Just Work and are easy to use.
Meanwhile, I expect that the DBAs are somewhere else, working on that
small subset of software that represents a hard database problem. Ships
haven’t changed; software has.

The same thing has happened to the dedicated system administrators, as
it happens: now you don’t necessarily need a full-time specialist to
deploy software in production.

[[team]]
== Team ÷ 2 - 1

Similar changes have affected project management at Lunatech:
transparency, communication tools and agile software development.

After Clay Shirky invented the Internet and transparency (not really -
I’m summarising), software developers realised that they could use
better communication tools, more transparency and sharing the workload
to make a third of project management redundant: information-sharing.
Status reports and status meetings are gone.

Agile software development has changed too, in that more of our
customers embrace rather than resist it. The change on the team is that
simpler agile methods facilitated by one or more developers (e.g. a
Scrum Master) make another ‘third’ of project management redundant:
managing the process and assigning work. Now developers self-assign
work.

[[management]]
== Project management

The first big consequence of this is that there is less project
management left: mostly stakeholder relationship management. Given the
occasional developer with good social skills, this becomes one of the
developer’s part-time responsibilities. The second change is that a lot
of the above, including agile software development and simpler
architectures, mean that we can solve the same problems with half the
number of developers.

The end result is that we replace the old six-person team that includes
a dedicated project manager, with a self-managing team of three
developers that includes one who spends around 30% of the time on
project management.

[[managers]]
== Project managers

Part of what makes the development team smaller is that you kill off
empire-building behaviour. There is a risk that a full-time project
manager won’t have enough to do unless the project is in trouble or
there are ten people to manage. Most project managers prefer the bigger
team. However, if project management is someone’s part-time overhead
function, they are likely motivated to do it as efficiently as possible,
to have more time to produce deliverables.

At Lunatech, we don’t need to worry about where this leaves pure-play
project managers, because we don’t hire them. I imagine that the good
ones find big or difficult projects that need a project-management
specialist, or that they diversify and broaden their roles to include
business analysis or product management (e.g. Scrum product owner)
roles.

[[question]]
== The concluding question

I suspect that the accidental evolution of half-size self-managing
development teams at Lunatech is something that might be reproduced
elsewhere. Does this sound plausible? Is it obvious how you might go
about this particular experiment, or would you need more detail on which
specific practices can make this possible, such as exactly how you get
rid of status meetings and customer status reports?

_link:/author/peter-hilton[Peter Hilton], who only has one stamp in his
merchant seaman’s discharge book, will be presenting
http://topconf.com/Conference/Abstracts/Transparentdevelopmentandtheprojectmanagement/tabid/141/language/en-US/Default.aspx[Transparent
development and the project management renaissance] at Topconf Tallinn
2012 in November. Peter is a senior software developer and Operations
Director at Lunatech Research, and co-author of the book
http://bit.ly/playforscala[Play for Scala] (Manning)._
