Or daytime Java developers doing Scala for personal projects, because it
turns out that a fair chunk of the attendees can’t use Scala (yet) in
their daily work. Especially consultants that join teams on existing
projects often can’t use Scala there. Luckily, coders thrive at night so
all is not lost, although people seem eager to apply more Scala during
the job.

My flight was a bit delayed and combined with needing a few minutes to
grasp and fully appreciate the London tube network which caused me to
walk in near the end of the first talk.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guy_L._Steele,_Jr.[Guy Steele] was
comparing Scala and Fortress. I knew Fortress only from it’s connections
to Fortran, which I came into contact with at University - I don’t want
to talk about it. Next stop was https://twitter.com/#!/jboner[Jonas
Bonér] with a short talk about Akka 2.0. It’s really nice to see how the
Akka team built upon the concepts of Akka 1 but generalized and
simplified things. Global state exchanged for an explicit Actor System
of which multiple can co-exist, no more distinction between local and
remote actors, scaling up and out through configuration only, ActorPaths
to lookup actors in the hierarchy and many more cool things.

https://twitter.com/#!/marius[Marius Eriksen] from Twitter held an
inspirational talk about their use of Futures, Offers and Brokers.
Futures are probably known, and Offers and Brokers are part of a Twitter
standard library named
http://twitter.github.com/effectivescala/#Twitter's%20standard%20libraries-Offer/Broker[Offer/Broker]
and can be used as a synchronization mechanism and communications
composition.

Typesafe’s https://twitter.com/#!/viktorklang[Viktor Klang] told us
about the upcoming Futures and Promises API in Scala, as outlined in
http://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/pending/futures-promises.html[SIP-14],
and determined it awesome that what he was saying made sense to the
audience. And make sense it did, because Klang is an enthusiastic and
organized speaker. He was also neatly done in the short amount of time
he had.

You may start to see two patterns emerge here: Concurrency and short
talks. The first one is explained by the `Concurrency' track that I was
following, the second one a complaint often heard in the Barbican’s
corridors. The consensus seemed to be that the 30 minutes that speakers
had was a bit short. I guess it is a necessary tradeoff with so many
good speakers and only two Scala Days.

The former black art of testing Akka actors and FSM’s was made into an
understandable regular practice by
https://twitter.com/#!/rolandkuhn[Roland Kuhn]. With the Akka TestKit,
you can do various ways of testing your actors and complete actor
systems. Intercepting and inspecting messages between actors, running
the actor system on a single thread to make the behavior deterministic
and even - if you really must - inspecting the internal state of an
actor using a TestActorRef. Maybe not as inspiring as other subjects,
but certainly assuring that testing is not an afterthought for the Akka
team.

The Barbican provided a fine lunch of mini-sandwiches, fruit and crisps
- as the locals would call them - during the one-and-a-half hour lunch
break. This gave plenty of time to exchange ideas with people, arguably
the most important aspect of such a conference.

After Lunch, Haskell-hero
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/simonpj/[Simon Peyton Jones]
from Microsoft Research provided a keynote about Haskell in the Cloud,
where serializing and transfering program code plays a big role.
https://twitter.com/#!/RIT[Brendan McAdams] - maintainer of the Java
driver for MongoDB and the Casbah Scala toolkit on top of it - did a
broad talk about asynchronous IO and some usable patterns and concepts
for dealing with it.

After an extended coffee break - where the attacks on the cookies may
have been an indication of the nutritional value of the sandwiches from
the lunch - the last session started for me with the second talk in the
session, about the developments on the http://scala-ide.org/[Eclipse
Scala IDE]. https://twitter.com/#!/jaguarul[Iulian Dragos] concurrently
adjusted his microphone for 30 minutes, and demonstrated the new
features of the upcoming 2.1 version of the Scala IDE. This release is
marking the shift from building towards a stable but not very feature
rich Scala IDE in the 2.0 release, and really powerful Scala features in
2.1 onwards. A really nice job from Dragos and the rest of the ScalaIDE
team. https://twitter.com/#!/mircodotta[Mirco Dotta] distributed some
Scala IDE t-shirts, of which I (as single ScalaIDE user) will be wearing
one purely as a provocation in the IntelliJ stronghold that is called
Lunatech.

After absorbing all these facts, opinions and ideas about Scala and
Scala tech, it was time for a London site-seeing tour with a typical red
double-decker bus and dinner at http://www.lincolnsinn.org.uk/[Lincoln’s
Inn].

The next day was supposed to start with a fifteen minute welcome talk,
but since no-one seemed to know who was supposed to give that,
https://twitter.com/#!/odersky[Martin Odersky] started and finished the
formalities with a ``So, welcome!'' and added the remainder of time to
his presentation about the current status and future of Scala.
http://jonasboner.com/2008/10/06/real-world-scala-dependency-injection-di/[Cakes]
are no longer served by the
http://stackoverflow.com/a/7861070/59174[Bakery of Doom], instead
unification of the compiler and the new
http://alots.wordpress.com/2012/03/06/getting-into-the-new-scalas-2-10-reflection-api/[reflections
API] give rise to supercakes: cakes on top of cakes, and this
unification paves the path for
http://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/pending/self-cleaning-macros.html[Macros],
which is a great new experimental feature in 2.10. Macros can do some of
the things only compiler plugins could do until now, but this time we
get a stable API for it and no longer have to expect breakage with new
compiler as is the case with compiler plugins. The new reflections API
is based on mirrors.

Immediately after Odersky, scalac wizard
https://twitter.com/#!/extempore2[Paul Phillips]’ talk ``inside the
sausage factory'' about the internals of the Scala compiler made us
realize that if Paul gets hit by a bus, we are screwed. In this light,
these have been two risky days, given the much higher likelihood of such
an event happening in London compared to anywhere else. The Scala
compiler turns out to be a piece of software where many best-practices
had to be disregarded in favor of performance. When a member of the
audience noted that all could not be that bad - with 27-ish compilation
phases, each phase probably does something that is fairly small and
hopefully isolated, right? - Paul’s reaction ``Muhahaha'' removed all
doubt of those thinking some exaggeration was going on.

After the coffee break, I went to the ``Scala-bility on the Web and
Elsewhere'' to see Lift committer
https://twitter.com/#!/indrajitr[Indrajit Raychaudhuri] tell us about
the new things in Lift 2.4. He assured us that while Lift has a steep
learning curve, there is a point where you get to the plateau and ``it’s
cruising from there''. They have a nice templating system based on CSS
selectors: `"#name *" #&gt; userName` replaces the content of the
element with id ``name'' with the contents of the userName value.

https://twitter.com/#!/pk11[Peter Hausel] presented Play 2.0 with a
focus on streamlining developer experience, and the efforts that the
Play team is making on error reporting for front-end technologies like
LESS, CSS, CoffeeScript and JavaScript. Afterwards, I bugged him with
what I think are some of the issues with Play 2.0, of which
composability of Forms is probably the biggest one.

Finally, https://twitter.com/#!/n8han[Nathan Hamblen] from Meetup made
us realize that if you value the cost of a simple while loop with a
counter variable that loops Int.MaxValue times at 5 pence, you’ll be
paying 1200 pounds for the same result if you use a for-comprehension.
And that is with compiler optimizations enabled, without, it’s even
worse. He then continued with an impressive overview of the building of
a very high performance service by avoiding the abstractions made by the
Servlet API and using non abstracted, highly tuned Netty handlers
instead, that was feasible to this specific situation since the backend
didn’t use any IO.

After lunch, http://zeebox.com/[Zeebox] co-founder
https://twitter.com/#!/anthonyrose[Anthony Rose] gave an inspiring talk
that had not much to do with Scala - although they have a technically
interesting problem and they do use Scala extensively - about the future
of television and the media industry.

In the afternoon, https://twitter.com/#!/nadamin[Nada Amin] presented
her academic work on a DSL for Javascript in Scala. Code written in this
DSL can either be executed directly on the server, or compiled to
Javascript. While at the early stages, this seems very promising. This
work was done in collaboration with
https://twitter.com/#!/gkossakowski[Gzregorz Kossakowski], who did the
next interpretation, about his work on compiling Scala to Javascript
using GWT. It was a truly inspirational talk in which Greg - easier to
pronounce - explained how he introduced an intermediate format jribble,
adapted the Scala compiler to output this format and adapted the GWT
compiler to accept this format and to compile it into Javascript. He
then only needed about 300 patches to the Scala standard library and the
job was done! Succesful compilation of Scala code to Javascript, with
only the exception of inherently impossible stuff in Javascript like
threads. However, when presented with the question whether he actually
preferred this approach or the approach of writing a DSL for Javascript,
after some hesitation he admitted that he preferred the DSL for most
tasks. Then Odersky got hold of a microphone, and asked the audience
whether it would prefer Scala to stay away from Javascript, or to do
full compilation of Scala code to Javascript or to introduce a DSL for
writing Javascript. The results were roughly 50/50 for the latter two
options.

This was the last talk of the day. Martin spoke a few kinds words about
the organization and assured us that there is going to be a new edition
of the Scala Days next year. This closed the official part of the
program. Some of us moved to the
http://www.theslaughteredlambpub.com/[Slaughtered Lamb] pub for some
fish & chips, and a few pints afterwards. There,
https://twitter.com/#!/@cyberzac[Martin Zachrison] convinced me to try
to use proportional fonts for coding for a while, which - at least at
that time - seems reasonable if you accept that vertically aligning
stuff is bad to begin with.

To wrap up, two succesful Scala days that were inspiring and educational
and a good place to put a face to twitter names and speak again with the
people you only see at conferences like these.
