By default, Slick query results are collections of Scala tuples, whose
structure corresponds to a Slick projection. When each row is more than
a single value, it is more natural to use domain model case classes than
tuples. To to this, add a mapping to the table definition’s default
projection, in the form of two functions that convert between tuples and
case class instances.

== Summary

Perform the following tasks to learn how to map query results.

[arabic]
. Define a table mapping to a tuple
. Define a default mapping to a case class
. Mapping multiple columns to custom types
. Use implicit conversions for custom types (or not)

Source code: https://github.com/lunatech-labs/play-slick-examples.

== Defining a table mapping to a tuple

To continue from previous tutorials, start with the table mapping from
http://blog.lunatech.com/2013/08/08/play-slick-getting-started[Getting
started with Play and Slick]. In your Play application, this is a
database model in:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala package
models.database

import play.api.db.slick.Config.driver.simple._

class Cocktails extends Tablelink:%22COCKTAIL%22[(Long, String)] \{ def
id = columnlink:%22ID%22[Long] def name = columnlink:%22NAME%22[String]
def * = id ~ name } \{% endhighlight %}

This class defines a mapping to the `COCKTAIL` database table, with two
columns and a projection called `*`.

Use this table mapping to define a `finder' method in your application’s
model layer, as explained in
http://blog.lunatech.com/2013/10/04/play-slick-executing-queries[Executing
database queries with Slick]. In `app/models/Cocktail.scala`:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/Cocktail.scala package models

import models.database.Cocktails import play.api.Play.current import
play.api.db.slick.Config.driver.simple._ import play.api.db.slick.DB
import scala.slick.session.Session

object Cocktail \{ val table = new Cocktails

def find: List[(Long, String)] = DB.withSession \{ implicit session:
Session => Query(table).list } } \{% endhighlight %}

The query results a list of `(Long, String)` pairs (tuples). Now you’re
ready for the next step.

== Defining a default mapping to a case class

Working with tuples is not convenient, and results in code that is hard
to maintain, because it is an anonymous structure. Instead, use add the
following case class to your model, so you can refer to `id` and `name`
by name.

Add the case class, before the `object Cocktail` declaration:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/Cocktail.scala case class
Cocktail(id: Option[Long], name: String) \{% endhighlight %}

The `id` has to be an `Option` type so you can create instances that do
not have an ID yet, before you insert them into the database.

Slick will return instances of this case class from queries if you
change the table mapping. To do this, first change the table superclass
type from `Table[(Long, String)]` to `Table[models.Cocktail]`. Next, use
the `<>` operator to add a mapping to the table’s default projection:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala def * =
id.? ~ name <> (Cocktail.apply _, Cocktail.unapply _) \{% endhighlight
%}

Note that you have to change the projection’s first column from `id` to
`id.?`, wrapping the column with Slick’s option type mapper to match the
`Option[Long]` type in the case class.

The mapping’s first function converts a `(Option[Long], String)` tuple
from the projection to a `Cocktail` instance. The second function
performs the opposite conversion,
`Cocktail => Option[(Option[Long], String)]`. In this case, you can use
the case class’ `apply` and `unapply` functions for the mapping, because
the case class structure matches the column types, in order.

The complete table mapping is now:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala package
models.database

import play.api.db.slick.Config.driver.simple._ import models.Cocktail

class Cocktails extends Tablelink:%22COCKTAIL%22[Cocktail] \{ def id =
columnlink:%22ID%22[Long] def name = columnlink:%22NAME%22[String] def *
= id.? ~ name <> (Cocktail.apply _, Cocktail.unapply _) } \{%
endhighlight %}

In general, it is so convenient to be able to use case class `apply` and
`unapply` functions (most of the time) that it is worth using this as a
starting point, even if you ultimately want a different case class
structure in your domain model - without IDs and with foreign keys
replaced by instances.

Now change the finder return type to `Cocktail`:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/Cocktail.scala def find:
List[Cocktail] = DB.withSession \{ implicit session: Session =>
Query(table).list } \{% endhighlight %}

== Mapping multiple columns to custom types

Sometimes you don’t want to map column values directly, because multiple
values represent a custom type. For example, add price information to
the cocktails table (or in a separate table if you know how to do
joins):

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala def
priceCurrency = columnlink:%22PRICE_CURRENCY%22[String] def priceAmount
=
columnlink:%22PRICE_AMOUNT%22,%20O.DBType(%22DECIMAL(13,3)%22)[BigDecimal]
\{% endhighlight %}

To support multiple currencies, these two columns will store a monetary
value as a three-letter http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217[ISO 4217]
currency code and a decimal amount, with a MySQL custom column type. You
could model these as two separate properties in the `Cocktail` case
class, but what you really want to do is use
http://www.joda.org/joda-money/[Joda Money].

Add `"org.joda" % "joda-money" % "0.9"` to the application dependencies
in `project/Build.scala`, and change the case class:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/Cocktail.scala import
org.joda.money.Money

case class Cocktail(id: Option[Long], name: String, price: Money) \{%
endhighlight %}

To make this work, you have to change the projection mapping functions
to convert between the `String` and `BigDecimal` values and
`org.joda.money.Money` instances. You can do this inline in the
projection declaration:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala

def * = id.? ~ name ~ priceCurrency ~ priceAmount <> ( c =>
Cocktail(c._1, c._2, money(c._3, c._4)), (c: Cocktail) => \{ Some((c.id,
c.name, c.price.getCurrencyUnit.getCode, c.price.getAmount)) })

private def money(currencyCode: String, amount: BigDecimal): Money = \{
val currency = CurrencyUnit.of(currencyCode) Money.of(currency,
amount.bigDecimal, RoundingMode.DOWN) } \{% endhighlight %}

This is already a lot less readable, even with this few database
columns. In practice, you should probably extract the functions to `map'
and `un-map' a table row:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala

def * = id.? ~ name ~ priceCurrency ~ priceAmount <> (mapRow _, unMapRow
_)

private def mapRow(id: Option[Long], name: String, currency: String,
amount: BigDecimal): Cocktail = \{ Cocktail(id, name, money(currency,
amount)) }

private def unMapRow(cocktail: Cocktail) = \{ val currency =
cocktail.price.getCurrencyUnit.getCode val amount: BigDecimal =
cocktail.price.getAmount val tuple = (cocktail.id, cocktail.name,
currency, amount) Some(tuple) } \{% endhighlight %}

Note that the `mapRow` and `unMapRow` functions are called `map` and
`comap` in the Slick source code.

== Using implicit conversions for custom types

You may want to use an implicit conversion instead of
`money(currency, amount)`. For example, you could just write
`(currency, amount)` or `currency -> amount` if you define the following
conversion from the tuple to `Money`:

\{% highlight scala %} // app/models/database/Cocktails.scala

implicit def tuple2Money(money: (String, BigDecimal)): Money = \{ val
currency = CurrencyUnit.of(money._1) Money.of(currency,
money._2.bigDecimal, RoundingMode.DOWN) } \{% endhighlight %}

Whether you do this is a matter of personal taste, and whether you think
using Scala implicit declarations like this is better than having
maintainable code.

== Next steps

Now you can map query results to case classes, you can:

* define join queries
* define aggregate and group-by queries
* http://blog.lunatech.com/2014/01/24/slick-insert-data[insert], update
and delete data.
