Jurgen writes that you should
http://www.noop.nl/2013/07/treat-your-suppliers-like-potato-wedges.html[Treat
Your Suppliers Like Potato Wedges], in which he explains the benefits of
not planning ahead when it comes to suppliers, even for important things
like food. And your business’ software.

____
Creative and technical products are so important for me that I prefer to
see them as daily food, not as big products. I need them every day, and
*I prefer not to plan too far ahead*. That’s why I pay
http://bravebox.nl/[Bravebox] (websites & design),
http://robomg.com/[Robo MG] (videos), and http://lunatech.com/[Lunatech]
(software) per month. No paperwork. No negotiations.

As an author I can’t work without the support of great suppliers who
charge a decent fee. But they know *I won’t waste time haggling over
price and details* because I trust they’re simply trying to do a good
job. Why wouldn’t they? I _could_ go somewhere else next month!
____

This goes against common practice in the IT business, where suppliers
push for bigger contracts and longer-term commitments from their
customers. This might be great for sales commissions and revenue
forecasts, but it can distract the many stakeholders from focusing on
building software that delivers business value to the real customer, and
tends to make agile software development impossible.

For us at Lunatech, this is a refreshing approach, because it means we
can spend our time on software development instead of contract
negotiation. It’s also refreshing to have a customer tell us that he’s
always more agile than his suppliers.

It probably goes without saying that this has to be an agile software
development project. When the project plan doesn’t include being able to
predict the future, either in theory or in practice, then other
approaches aren’t an option.

Perhaps this approach wouldn’t work for everyone, or for every project,
but if Melly’s happy then we’re happy.
