[cols="",]
|===
|layout: article

|title: Sdu Uitgevers - Sdu Web Services

|tags: case-study REST XML

|author: Sietse de Kaper

|signature: Sietse de Kaper is a software developer at Lunatech.

|summary: "Sdu Uitgevers hired Lunatech to design and develop a way to

|unlock publications for use in their customers’ IT infrastructure. The
main

|goals were easy integration and full flexibility for customers. The
result is

|_Sdu WebServices_ (SWS)."
|===

SWS is a REST-based web service hosted by Sdu Uitgevers that allows
(third-party) client-applications to access the content of most core
publications delivered by http://www.sdu.nl/[Sdu Uitgevers].

This allows Sdu customers’ web sites to integrate with the same data
collections that power popular applications such as
http://opmaat.sdu.nl/[_OpMaat_] and its related products such as
http://www.jaronline.nl/[_JARonline_] and
https://www.officielebekendmakingen.nl/[_Officiële Bekendmakingen_].
Content includes the Official Publications, Dutch legislation (from
http://www.wetten.nl/[wetten.nl]), European legislation, various types
of jurisprudence, news and other commentary. More content collections
are added regularly.

SWS can be used as a mechanism for pull-based data delivery, as well as
a source of directly syndicated content. Using a well-documented RESTful
API, client applications can query for publications and incorporate an
HTML representation of the content directly on their web pages.
Alternatively, the content can be accessed in XML format, allowing
custom processing for inclusion in the customer’s own content
repository, among other things.

Conceptually, SWS provides two major services.

* _Search_ - a query API supports extended searches through the various
collections SWS offers on both the full document contents and its
metadata. Search results are returned in the well-known and widely
supported http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom_%28standard%29[Atom]
syndication format, which additional functionality offered by the
http://www.opensearch.org/[OpenSearch] extension.
* _Content retrieval_ - SWS provides an XML based representation of the
publications in its collections, as well as a powerful viewer
application that clients can customise for optimal integration into
their own webpages. The XML output for all types of content is
well-defined in RelaxNG schema files, and continuously checked for
quality.

To make integration as easy as possible, Lunatech designed SWS to make
full use of open standards. This, combined with extensive developer
documentation, makes that SWS provides a solid base for any application
that uses Sdu publications as a source for content.
