[cols="",]
|===
|layout: article

|title: Sdu publishing system - technical upgrade

|tags: case-study jboss seam jee

|author: Vijay Kiran

|signature: Vijay Kiran is a software developer at Lunatech.

|summary: "http://lunatech.com[Lunatech] has been helping build and
maintain

|several software systems and publication platforms for Sdu. Lunatech
recently

|upgraded the platform and application to a more recent version of

|constituent technologies to make sure that the application is
well-maintained

|and up-to-date."
|===

== Introduction

http://www.sdu.nl/[Sdu Uitgevers] works closely with the Dutch
government and provides publication services helping government bodies
to publish official versions of various government documents. In 2010,
Lunatech worked with Sdu to build one of the platforms using enterprise
Java Seam 2 framework, running on the JBoss 4.x application server
(JBoss AS). Read our
http://blog.lunatech.com/2010/01/25/electronic-government-publications[Case
study].

This technical case study gives an overview of the approach we followed
in making the upgrade project successful.

== Goals

Lunatech upgraded the platform and application to a more recent version
of constituent technologies to make sure that the application is
well-maintained and up-to-date, as part of ongoing adaptive maintenance.

The application platform consists of complex software modules that
integrate with external web services, conversion systems (using XML/XSLT
transformations), business rules implementation and messaging. Lunatech
built the system’s user interface
http://www.jboss.org/richfaces[RichFaces] and
http://www.seamframework.org/Home/JBossSeam#H-Seam2[Seam 2], which
provided the visibility of various business process workflows, and
access to manual actions.

The goal of this upgrade and migration project was to analyse each
system component system and upgrade to the latest version. In case of
obsolete components, Lunatech reviewed the functionality and implemented
it using better technology where possible. Apart from upgrading the
application, there have also been significant changes and improvements
in the underlying platform (JBoss AS and Java EE), which we also
considered for the upgrade.

In addition to keeping the platform and application up-to-date, the
upgrade project also used improved technologies where appropriate to
provide better performance and improve usability and overall system
stability.

== Approach & implementation

The approach we followed in this project is first to create the
inventory of various libraries and components used in the system and
prepare the strategy of upgrade for each one. For simple cases, such as
upgrading a library to the current version, the effort required was
fairly minimal, as for upgrading the Apache Commons library used in the
system or the Axis2 modules that interact with the external web
services.

The platform’s backend services were mostly driven by Enterprise
JavaBeans (EJBs - Stateless Session Beans and Message-driven beans) and
the business rules were implemented using
http://www.jboss.org/drools/[Drools]. Since the EJBs were written using
the Java EE6 standard, the effort required to port them to the newer
version of JBoss platform was minimal.

http://ant.apache.org[Apache Ant] was previously used as the build
system, being more or less standard when the application was first
built. Lunatech migrated the build to use http://maven.apache.org[Apache
Maven], now an industry-standard software configuration management tool
for Java projects.

More complex cases such as upgrading Seam 2 to Seam 3 (CDI/Weld) needed
more work - reviewing the architecture and updating components. Seam 2
and Seam 3 (now mostly
http://incubator.apache.org/deltaspike/[DeltaSpike]) are completely
different frameworks and upgrading from Seam 2 to Seam 3 involves more
than swapping the libraries.

The previous version of the application’s user interface was built using
RichFaces. We decided to port the user interface to a simpler library
that provides better theming and user interface functionality. We
selected http://primefaces.org[PrimeFaces], which has significantly
reduced the amount of front-end code, while making the application look
and perform better.

The last major piece of the upgrade puzzle was upgrading JBoss AS 4.x to
latest version of JBoss AS - 7.1.1. The configuration of the JBoss
changed significantly compared to the 4.x series, but the migration was
straightforward. The only custom feature of JBoss AS 4.x in use were the
Scheduler xMBeans, which have been changed to a platform-independent
technology: http://quartz-scheduler.org/[Quartz Scheduler].

Since this is a major upgrade, Lunatech adopted a comprehensive
phased-testing approach, to make sure that we didn’t miss anything
during upgrade. As well as reviewing the manual acceptance test plans,
we also improved automated testing using
http://arquillian.org/[Arquillian], which has helped us write
fine-grained integration tests for several features.

== Conclusion

At http://www.lunatech.com[Lunatech], we have been working with the
complex publishing systems for well over a decade. Over the years,
Lunatech has acquired significant domain knowledge and
http://lunatech.com/services/technology-solutions[technology expertise]
in building and maintaining complex enterprise systems, which we use to
deliver quality solutions to our clients.

Having completed this upgrade project, we provided considerable value to
our client - Sdu Uitgevers - by keeping their software platform
up-to-date and healthy.
