== Introduction

In a http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_text_search[full-text search],
FTS for short, the search engine examines all of the words in every
stored document as it tries to match search criteria. Unfortunately,
Core Data, iOS’s native persistence framework, does not offer support
for FTS, however Core Data internally relies on an SQLite database for
storage on iOS devices. This allows for the usage of SQLite’s FTS4
engine.

To implement this solution I wrote a small app with a simplified data
structure similar to that of one of our client apps. For searching, this
meant it should search through at least 10,000 documents on a title and
content properties where the content would be filled with HTML-rich
text. A dataset that closely resembled this is one from
http://stackoverflow.com[Stackoverflow], publicly available at
http://blog.stackoverflow.com/category/cc-wiki-dump. I took the
users.xml file. It contains about 300,000 users where the fields
displayName and aboutMe(HTML rich-text) closely resemble the content in
our client’s app.

The app displays a list of Stackoverflow user accounts in a `tableView`.
The users are searchable through the `tableView`’s searchbar.

== Global architecture

In the app I will implement FTS using SQLite’s FTS functionality. To
simplify communication between the app and its database,
https://github.com/ccgus/fmdb[FMDB] will be used, FMDB is an Objective-C
wrapper around SQLite. The virtual table is created in the same SQLite
database in wich the Core Data content resides. To keep this table as
light as possible only object properties relevant to the search query
are inserted.

Search results are sorted on their relevance, which is calculated by
SQLite in a custom ranking function. The custom function is added to
SQLite using the provided http://www.sqlite.org/capi3.html[C API].
Objects in the resultset contain an identifier corresponding to the Core
Data object. The relevant Core Data objects are fetched using an array
containg the IDs retrieved by the FTS query. Results are displayed by a
`searchDisplayController` in a `tableView`, ordered(`DESC`) based on
their relevance ranking to the search query.

Global architecture

== Pre-requisites:

To use the SQLite FTS engine it is necessary to include the SQLite
library in the iOS project, and since there are no iOS specific versions
of SQLite it’s necessary to add it as a static library and compile it.
Here is how it can be done:

* Download the SQLite source from http://www.sqlite.org/download.html
* Open Xcode, create a new Project
* Under the iOS section, select Framework & Library, create an new Cocoa
Touch Static library.
* Add the SQLite source files (`sqlite3.c` and `sqlite3.h`) to the
project
* In project build settings, make sure the compiler is set to the LLVM
compiler 4.1
* In project build settings, add the following LLVM preprocessor macros:
** For debug: `SQLITE_DEBUG`, `SQLITE_ENABLE_FTS3_PARENTHESIS` and
`SQLITE_ENABLE_FTS3`
** For release: `SQLITE_ENABLE_FTS3_PARENTHESIS` and
`SQLITE_ENABLE_FTS3`
* Add this Xcode framework-project as a whole to the Xcode iOS
app-project.

For ease of use I also included FMDB to interface with SQLite.

* Download FMDB from github https://github.com/ccgus/fmdb
* Add it to the iOS project in Xcode
* Add its dependency, FMDB requires `libsqlite3.dylib` to be included
with the project.
** In project build phases under `Link binary with libraries'.

== Implementation

This paragraph will describe the steps necessary to implement FTS. The
virtual table should be created and filled simultaneously to the initial
creation of the Core Data-database. When creating the virtual table
specify that FTS is used:

\{% highlight objectivec %} BOOL tableCreated = [_db
executeUpdate:@``CREATE VIRTUAL TABLE ZUSERINDEX USING fts4(displayName,
aboutMe, id);'']; \{% endhighlight %}

The `_db` variable is an instance of FMDatabase. For convenience this
instance could be placed in an Singleton object so that is accessible
throughout the app.

From the searchDisplayController delegate method
`shouldReloadTableForSearchString` I trigger the custom search method
which executes an FTS select query on the virtual table.

\{% highlight objectivec %} _result = [_db executeQuery:[NSString
stringWithFormat:@"SELECT displayName, id FROM ZUSERINDEX WHERE
ZUSERINDEX MATCH ’*%@*’ ORDER BY CustomRank(matchinfo(ZUSERINDEX))
DESC;", searchText]]; \{% endhighlight %}

The function `CustomRank` is added to SQLite using following statement:

\{% highlight objectivec %} sqlite3_create_function(db, ``CustomRank'',
1, SQLITE_UTF8, NULL, &CustomRank, NULL, NULL); \{% endhighlight %}

The db variable is the sqlite handle, which is exposed as a
property(`sqliteHandle`) by FMDB. Following arguments are the name of
the function, the number of arguments it takes, and the function itself.
Note that newer versions of FMDB also support the adding of functions
via blocks, using `makeFunctionNamed:maximumArguments:withBlock:`.

The ranking function takes the `matchinfo()` results as argument.
http://www.sqlite.org/fts3.html#matchinfo[`Matchinfo`] is an auxiliary
function provided by SQLite which contains (amongst others), the column
in which the phrase hit a match and the number of phrases:

\{% highlight objectivec %} static void CustomRank(sqlite3_context
*context, int argc, sqlite3_value **argv) \{ if (argc != 1)
sqlite3_result_null(context); if (sqlite3_value_type(argv[0]) ==
SQLITE_NULL) sqlite3_result_null(context);

....
int weight = 0;
unsigned int *blob = (unsigned int *)sqlite3_value_blob(argv[0]);

unsigned int numberOfPhrases = blob[0];
unsigned int numberOfColumns = blob[1];

// Ranking details left out.

sqlite3_result_int(context, weight);
....

} \{% endhighlight %}

For each matching phrase in each column the weight is increased. Our
ranking function `CustomRank` is written in C. It is of course possible
to write your custom function in Objective-C, but it gets a bit more
tricky to convert the arguments to the right types.

This returns a FMDBResultset with the `id` column sorted by relevance as
I defined it. I added the results in a `NSArray`.

\{% highlight objectivec %} FMResultSet *rs = [_database
executeQuery:SQLFetchRequest]; _displayNameArray = [NSMutableArray
array]; _idArray = [NSMutableArray array]; while ([rs next]) \{
[_displayNameArray addObject:[rs stringForColumn:@``displayname'']];
[_idArray addObject:[rs stringForColumn:@``id'']]; } \{% endhighlight %}

The `TableViewDatasource` can be implemented to use these arrays as
datasource and display their content in cells based on `indexPath.row`.
When a cell is selected I query Core Data for the actual object based on
the object id from `_idArray` using the following predicate:

\{% highlight objectivec %} [NSPredicate
predicateWithFormat:@``identifier = %@'', [_idArray
objectAtIndex:indexPath.row]]; \{% endhighlight %}

The result is a `tableView` with search option that responsively
displays full-text search results in order of their relevance.

== Performance

There are some performance issues in the implementation described above.
This becomes apparent when the query is fired with only a single
character. All documents may contain the character `e'. Calculating the
ranks of the resultset from this query can take up to 1.5 seconds on
older devices. A solution would be to not rank the results of single
character queries, or only to fire the query after the second character
was given.

The screenshots below show the perfomance gain over the Core Data
queries:

SQLites Full-text search.

Core Data with `contains[cd]` predicate.

97.8% CPU usage vs 87.9% CPU usage, an almost 10% decrease. Profiler
results of memory usage see an allocation decrease from 131.56 to 19.85
MB, at least a 660% decrease. In practise this means that the app will
remain responsive while searching.

== Conclusion

Although this implementation may not be as elegant when compared to Core
Data-based search implementions, this SQLite implementation offers
something Core Data does not: full-text search. Next to that, it
performs almost 10% faster and at least 660% more (memory) efficiently
than a comparable Core Data query.

== Further thoughts

Core Data could be left out of this implementation, SQLite offers
comparable functionality, improved performance and FTS. This would mean
that the `tableViewDatasource` would have to be adjusted to map the FMDB
resultset rather than the CoreData `fetchRequest` resultset.
