= Lunatech blog retrospective - 2009
hilton
v1.0, 2014-06-06
:title: Lunatech blog retrospective - 2009
:tags: [opinion]

In 2009, we continued to fight JSF, win (usually), write about it, 
    and tell our war stories at JBoss User Group events. However, the most
    interesting blog posts were about other topics.

image:../media/2009-12-21-chrimble-cocktail/chrimble-cocktail.jpg[Chrimble cocktail]

== Programming

link:/posts/2009-02-03-what-every-web-developer-must-know-about-url-encoding[What
every web developer must know about URL encoding] is probably the most
popular article on the Lunatech blog, and still getting a lot of
attention years later. This is not just because Stéphane’s article does
what it says on the tin (it explains in detailed what every web
developer must know about URL encoding), but because there aren’t enough
other ways to learn this stuff and because so many pervasive web
application bugs are due to these issues. This is the basis of web
development, which is already more than twenty years old, and these
issues aren’t going away any time soon, so it’s never too late to catch
up.

link:/posts/2009-09-18-support-original-language-accept-language-header[Support
for original language in Accept-Language header] continues along similar
lines, in which Francisco writes about an HTTP request header that is
perhaps less important to most people, who aren’t constantly doing
(natural) language negotiation In Real Life. Lunatech is perhaps
different, though, having a disproportionate number of staff who are
tri-lingual.

link:/posts/2009-11-23-generating-scalable-barcodes-itext-and-seam[Generating
scalable barcodes with iText and Seam], by comparison, is a much more
practical kind of article and even has pictures (or bar codes) as well
as code. This is still my favourite kind of blog post, because software
library documentation and books can never go into detail on every
possible practical use case, so a well-written article on a niche topic
can easily be the definitive reference (i.e. the only good Google search
result). This is great for those development tasks that you only ever
have to do once, but still take a long time to figure out if you haven’t
done it before and can’t find a description on-line.

== Architecture

link:/posts/2009-12-14-decision-service-architecture-jboss-rules[Decision
service architecture with JBoss Rules] was a rare digression into the
higher-level territory of software architecture, which we don’t usually
bother talking about because it always sounds so vague. (That’s probably
not a good thing.) It’s worth doing for niche enterprise libraries and
frameworks, though, because it’s usually not obvious when and how to use
them. In more recent years, we have had similar discussions and learning
experiences with other technologies, such as Activiti and Apache Camel,
but sadly no blog posts.

== And now for something completely different

link:/posts/2009-12-21-chrimble-cocktail[Chrimble cocktail] is an altogether
different kind of tutorial, which has nothing much to do with
programming or even beer. Christmas, however, is a good time to be a
polyglögg programmer as well as a polyglot programmer. It’s a good idea
to try a new cocktail every year as well as a new programming language.
It’s just too bad I didn’t get around to writing the follow-up blog
post: _Do TDD-ers drink mocktails?_

_Photo: https://www.flickr.com/photos/orijinal/4726603759[Jaysin
Trevino]_
