= Blog retrospective 2005
hilton
v1.0, 2014-05-23
:title: Blog retrospective 2005
:tags: [blog]

Overall, there were 22 Lunatech blog posts in 2005 on a mixture of
topics, mostly about web development. Back in 2005, we were building
Java web applications with Struts 1.2 and Hibernate, running on JBoss
3.2.

== Technology

http://blog.lunatech.com/2005/07/29/struts-urls[Struts URLs for
perfectionists] is my favourite technology article from 2005, because it
describes a rare success in fighting wrong-headed J2EE web technology
and managing to build a more HTTP-centric web application. While
everyone else was building web applications with ugly URLs like:

....
/customer.do?method=edit&id=42
....

… or worse, we had worked out how to get Struts to work with something
cleaner, like:

....
/customer/edit/42
....

In hindsight, this is a clear example of one reason why we would
inevitably recognise the http://www.playframework.com[Play Framework] as
a Good Thing when it arrived some years later.

== Agile software development

http://blog.lunatech.com/2005/10/07/information-radiators-dashboard-wall[Information
radiators: from dashboard to wall] describes an example of an agile
software development technique in Alistair Cockburn’s
http://alistair.cockburn.us/Agile+software+development+book[2001 book on
the topic] that we had used on the Struts project with the nice URLs
(see above):

image::http://blog.lunatech.com/2005/10/07/information-radiator-small.jpg[An
information radiator]

This kind of thing is a lot more common these days, with more Scrum
projects than you can shake a stick at, but agile software development
was less mainstream and featured a lot less hype back in 2005.

== Business

image::http://blog.lunatech.com/2005/09/13/business-lunch.jpg[business
lunch]

http://blog.lunatech.com/2005/09/13/business-lunch-rules[Business lunch
rules] is my favourite, though, because these instructions for how to
have an effective business lunch are timeless in a way that Struts and
agile software development aren’t. In this article, Michael sets the
rules for not only how to use that expense account effectively, but with
class.

_Photo: https://www.flickr.com/photos/94150506@N08/8931329670[Lena
Vasiljeva]_
