____
http://youtu.be/hJYNyJWhaAI[Interview with Peter Hilton - stories of
remote working] (69 minutes)
____

In a way, the benefits of remote working are obvious, but perhaps not
for everyone, and there are benefits that you might not expect.

image::remote-working.jpg[Near Peille in the South of France]

== More collaborations are possible

The clearest benefit of enabling remote working is that you create the
possibility for collaborations that are not otherwise possible. In my
case, I wasn’t usually the one working remotely: I was based in the
Lunatech office in Rotterdam, but worked with colleagues and customers
in other countries.

If you’re the person working remotely then this really is obvious: if
you work remotely then you can be Stéphane in the South of France.
https://plus.google.com/+StéphaneÉpardaud[Stéphane Épardaud], who had
previously worked at Lunatech, joined us again after doing a PhD but
worked from home. Home was a steep valley somewhere North of Nice that
certainly counts as `remote' by Dutch standards (photo). We were able to
work together on a software development project, because our tools
worked the same way wherever we were, and because we were happy to do
most of our interaction via an IRC channel.

On another project, Lunatech’s `remote team' in Rotterdam developed
software for a US government project. We only flew to Washington DC for
project kick-off and completion meetings, six months apart. Once you’re
off-site it doesn’t necessarily matter where you are.

Making remote working possible enables collaborations that aren’t
otherwise possible, with both customers and employees.

== Less impact when staff stay at home

A company that enables remote working makes its IT infrastructure
accessible from outside the building, securely, so staff can log in to
the tools they use on the job. The remote-aware company has web-based
work tracking, group chat and other online collaboration in place, so
that staff don’t have to troop down the corridor to a meeting room to be
able to collaborate on their work.

In practice, the chat room is a lifesaver for someone who has to stay at
home occasionally, for a delivery, just as much as for the colleague who
works remotely from another city. Online collaboration tools may be
intended for staff who always work remotely, but they turn out to also
be useful for staff who unexpectedly work from home from time to time.
This is important because the latter group is _everyone_.

Enabling remote working reduces the impact when an employee has to stay
at home for a day. This benefits everyone, not just people who work
off-site.

== Better collaboration in the office

The even-less-obvious benefit to remote working is that it makes things
easier for people who don’t work remotely at all. Web-based tracking
tools like https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira[JIRA] and
https://trello.com[Trello], accessible both inside and outside the
building, make teams’ activities visible. The value of keeping everyone
on the same page is something that various software tools that take
literally.

When a team uses web-based tools, URL-sharing becomes common. This is
one of many reasons why a chat room becomes useful - providing the
real-time commentary of a team at work. Telling someone that `it’s on
the wiki' is a much less annoying answer to a question if it comes with
a clickable link.

Embracing tooling for remote working is like the usability that comes
from Good Grips kitchen tools. The additional communication channels
benefit everyone, even people in the office.
http://www.asktog.com/columns/048GoodGrips.html[Tog explains] this best:

____
Designs for the disabled don’t have to hurt usability for the
normally-abled. In fact, if you are doing your job properly, your
designs will help everyone.
____

When some people work remotely, office-bound staff benefit too.
Sometimes the chat room is more convenient than the meeting room.

== Enable team rotation

A potential benefit of remote working is the impact it has on
transferring knowledge to new team members. A co-located team may
maintain project knowledge in a purely oral culture, which is not
feasible when some team members work remotely. Working remotely on a
software development project requires certain project and system
documentation to make it possible to get started easily.

This is most clearly visible on successful open source projects: their
web sites explain clearly what the project is for, what its goals are
and how to get started on development. The better the tooling, the fewer
steps there are to getting the software to build, test and run it
locally.

This is an open question - whether the project and system documentation
it requires is actually essential for all successful software teams: do
the co-located teams who try to do without suffer as a consequence?
