= Lunatech blog retrospective - 2008
hilton
v1.0, 2014-06-05
:title: Lunatech blog retrospective - 2008
:tags: [opinion]

Lunatech followed on from the 2007 developer events with bigger
    events in 2008. Meanwhile, we started 
    learning new ways to write about and teach technology in a variety of 
    technical blog posts by different people.

image:../media/2008-01-17-jbug-2008-02/jbug-2008-02-paddys.jpg[Paddy
Murphy’s]

== Events

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-01-17-jbug-2008-02[Benelux JBoss User
Group, 29 February 2008] was the best developer user group event ever,
because we got a location with truly excellent facilities. As well as
the main presentation screen there were additional television screens to
view the slides, and refreshments were served continually during the
presentations. The event was at Paddy Murphy’s Irish pub’s sports bar,
which, as the
https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-03-03-benelux-jboss-user-group-29-february-photos[photos
of the event] show, was pretty busy.

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-10-02-lunatech-golf-invitational-2008[Lunatech
Golf Invitational 2008] was the first business event for a while, at the
Rottebergen golf club in Rotterdam, with competition, prizes and drinks
afterwards. Not only was it great weather but, as Michael wrote, `Most
importantly we enjoyed a lovely day while others were forced to work'.

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-12-05-meeting-avoidance-self-managing-developers-devoxx-2008[Meeting-avoidance
for self-managing developers - Devoxx 2008] published the slides of the
presentation at Devoxx, which had to be renamed from JavaPolis after
Sun’s lawyers reportedly claimed trademark infringement. Incidentally,
the story goes that the conference organisers abandoned the Javoxx name
to avoid yet another round of negotiations. Aside from
JavaPolis/Javoxx/Devoxx/whatever remaining a cool conference, this
presentation marks the start of agile software development being
something to talk about in itself.

== Technical writing

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-05-09-bean-validation-java-ee[Bean
validation in Java EE] was the first serious technical article of the
year - Stéphane Épardaud’s long and serious explanation of Java EE
solutions to hard validation problems. The value of this kind of article
is that it takes this much detail and explanation to understand this
kind of Java EE topic.

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-10-03-xml-and-namespaces[XML and
Namespaces] by Bart Schuller is something different: a short explanation
of something that is frequently misunderstood, despite not being that
hard to understand. Compared to many technologies, XML standards are not
so hard to understand, but they do still require some thought and clear
thinking about core concepts, such as what a URI is.

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-10-29-introduction-ztemplates[Introduction
to ZTemplates] is different again. In this article Mattias van der
Vlies, who was an intern at Lunatech, wrote a brief introduction to a
new web framework, so you can see a few code examples to get a feel for
what the framework is like, and to make an initial assessment of its
pros and cons. This is the kind of `five-minute introduction' that you
really want to see in every framework’s own documentation. However, just
because it’s worth having doesn’t mean that writing it is as easy as it
looks, which is why it’s a good exercise for anyone with some spare
time. Spending a day trying something out and writing up the conclusions
is time well spent, especially if Google says you’re first. (For what
it’s worth, as of June 2014, this article is still the first Google
search result for `ztemplates introduction'.)

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-12-20-getting-list-time-zones-java-and-seam[Getting
a list of time zones in Java and Seam] is another kind of framework
documentation - a tutorial, rather than an introduction. The catch with
flexible frameworks, such as JBoss Seam 2.0 in this case, is that even
though the manual might describe a general case like `writing your own
Seam component', there are usually plenty of ways to get stuck when you
actually try to do it yourself. What’s harder than it looks in this case
is actually showing all of the steps, with code, without leaving
anything out and ending up with a readable result.

== Software development

https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-07-22-programmer%E2%80%99s-private-office[The
programmer’s private office] is obviously shameless bragging (a.k.a.
marketing) about how working at Lunatech could mean having a private
office with a door, in the same way that
https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2008-02-11-my-new-pc-mac[My new PC is a Mac]
was about the new Mac Pro under the desk, replacing the Linux desktop
that everyone else had. In 2008 (at least) the only thing better than
not using Windows on the desktop was not using Linux either. Ironically,
the year of Linux of the desktop might have actually arrived since then,
but we wouldn’t know because now we all have a MacBook Pro.

Perhaps these aren’t particularly interesting (or annoyingly smug) blog
posts, but I would certainly like to read more and see more pictures of
where and how other people work, and why. For example,
http://blog.fogcreek.com/the-price-of-dev-happiness-part-one/[The Price
of (Dev) Happiness] at Fog Creek in New York might be more irritating
but anything else, but it should also be thought-provoking and possibly
even discussion-provoking. In practice, you usually have to actually
visit companies to discover this kind of thing.
